The aim of this project was to investigate the influence of a wall on the movement of a vortex ring travelling in water, with the final intention of determining whether a tank used for vortex generation in the fluids department is big enough so as not to have an effect on the rings produced within it, i.e. whether it can be assumed that there is an infinite distance between the rings and the wall.
An existing vortex ring generator was used with modifications within it in order to vary the distance of a wall from the rings being produced. The rings were produced using a piston/nozzle arrangement, within which the variables of piston velocity and piston stroke length were altered. Altering these variables changed the internal properties and size of the vortex rings produced, enabling comparison between the wall distance and different vortex ring scenarios.
It was discovered that at as the wall distance decreased, the effect on the vortex rings increased to a high extent. In most cases the vortex rings changed direction and moved towards the wall and hit it, instead of continuing in their intended vertical motion. At wall distances of 135mm, only comparatively minor changes in direction were noted. However, greater distances were not experimented with due to physical complications with the tank layout.
Although the evidence cannot be considered as conclusive, the data found does suggest that the diameter of the tank is large enough not effect the movement of the vortex rings within it.
The aim of this project was to investigate the influence of a wall on the movement of a vortex ring travelling in water, with the final intention of determining whether a tank used for vortex generation in the fluids department is big enough so as not to have an effect on the rings produced within it, i.e. whether it can be assumed that there is an infinite distance between the rings and the wall. It was also desirable to determine at what particular distance the wall begins to influence the vortex rings.
The project was put forward by Dr Peter J Thomas as a response to analysts suggesting that the tank of water did not have a large enough diameter for the rings produced within it not to be influenced by the walls.
Experimentation will be done on an existing vortex ring generator with modifications in order to investigate the effect of a wall in the vicinity of the vortex rings.
The vortex rings that have been produced can be thought of as being similar to smoke rings that a proficient smoker can blow. The differences are that in this case the rings are produced in water by the movement of a piston, and are visualised using a dye, rather than through the use of smoke.
Vortex rings have been investigated to a large extent for at over a century, using increasingly sophisticated methods to produce them and investigate their behaviour. Initially, basic methods such as allowing "a drop of water, lightly colored (sic) with milk or food dye, to fall from an eye-dropper or a burette into a glass of water" (Shariff, 1992) were used. As technology increased more technical and repeatable techniques were developed, producing the method of pushing fluid through a nozzle using a piston. More recently, computer models have been set up in order to model vortex rings, with varying degrees of success.
Vortex rings are not only formed in the laboratory, they are occasionally formed in nature, such as from volcanoes in the form of smoke rings, or even by dolphins in the form of air rings. Figure 4.1 shows a beluga whale blows a ring at the Vancouver Aquarium.
Another case, although not related to this project, is the production of vortex rings as dark solitons decayed in a Bose-Einstein Condensate (Anderson, Haljan, Regal, Feder, Collins, Clark, Cornell). This is an example of how "accelerating ions in superfluid helium create quantized vortex rings" as stated in (Shariff, 1992).
The technique of vortex ring production, where fluid is pushed through a nozzle is the most commonly used, as it is fairly simple to produce and has a high degree of repeatability. The reason that pushing fluid through a nozzle produces a vortex ring is that "a blob of fluid emerges from the hole", which then "rolls up into the form of an oblate spheroid owing to the self-induction of the vorticity produced at the edge of the hole." (Maxworthy, 1974) or as described by (Glezer, 1988) "The flow separates at the edge of the orifice and a cylindrical vortex sheet forms and rolls up into a vortex ring." A model of this self-similar roll-up is described by Shariff and then modelled and computed to an extent, by Nitsche and Krasny (1994), that photos of actual roll-up and computed roll-up would be fairly difficult to identify from one another by eye. The vortex ring formation process is also modelled to a high extent more recently by Mohseni, Ran, and Colonius (2001).
Many different aspects of vortex rings have been investigated which include the factors that determine whether a ring is laminar or turbulent, the properties of these forms, interactions between vortex rings and other bodies, and also visually appealing phenomena such as leapfrogging of rings.
In 1987 Glezer examined the factors which determine whether a "given vortex generator produces either an initially laminar ring, which may or may not undergo instability and transition to turbulence, or an initially turbulent ring." (Glezer, 1988) Through experimentation with different nozzle diameters, piston velocities, and stroke lengths, a "transition map that reveals a reasonably well defined boundary separating vortex rings that are turbulent upon formation from those that are not" (Glezer, 1988) was produced. This was important because a range of dimensionless parameters were formed which allow for translation onto other similar experiments, which do not necessarily use the same geometries. Glezer states that his experimental set up has "properties that make it attractive as a standard" (Glezer, 1988).
Glezer 's work was important because it defined to a reasonable extent when a vortex ring would be either laminar or turbulent on formation. This is important because the properties of laminar and turbulent rings are inherently different from one another. Shariff discusses the properties of laminar and turbulent rings to a high extent in his paper 'Vortex Rings'. Essentially, a turbulent vortex ring can be described as "a compact turbulent region with net linear momentum, statistically invariant with respect to rotation about one axis" (Shariff, 1988) Vortex rings can not only be turbulent initially upon formation, but a laminar vortex ring can also become turbulent. Maxworthy suggests that this is due to an azimuthal instability within the ring core. The conditions that determine whether a vortex ring changes from laminar to turbulent, and possibly back again, depends, according to Maxworthy (1972), on its Renold 's number. At low values, a laminar ring will continue its movement until the edge of a tank or another boundary is reached. At a Renold 's number of greater than 600, an azimuthal instability will occur, yet the ring will not transform into a turbulent state. For higher values of Renold 's number, Maxworthy states that in his observations a ring would gain an azimuthal instability and then "the wavy structure collapsed into a turbulent blob and the vorticity was effectively cancelled by turbulent diffusion" (Maxworthy, 1972). At very large values of Renold 's number the ring would become turbulent, an "apparently disorganised vorticity field" (Maxworthy, 1972), and from this a new vortex ring was formed.
These studies of vortex rings are relevant to the project at hand, due to the fact that the form of vortex ring is relevant to its subsequent activity. However, studies on vortex ring interactions with various bodies have been done which are relevant to a greater extent. Much of these experiments are concerned with the interactions between a vortex ring and objects that are placed in its way. D. Rockwell, in 'Vortex-Body Interactions', investigates the "interactions of a vortex, or combinations of them, with a cylinder, blade, or foil".
Vortex rings have also been fired towards a wall normal to its axis in order to investigate the effects of the wall on the ring as it draws closer to it, as it collides with it, and after it collides with it. Boldes and Ferreri in 'Behaviour of vortex rings in the vicinity of a wall' investigated this to quite a high extent. In this it was discovered that a "vortex ring traveling (sic) toward a wall situated normal to its axis may undergo momentary inversions of its forward momentum." (Boldes, 1973).
However, the most relevant piece of research that has been done, in terms of this project, is the work Yue, Zhang, and Shen in their work 'The Mechanism of Vortex Connection at a Free Surface'. This is relevant because they consider a free surface parallel to the axis of the vortex ring, which is the same situation as that in this project. They consider this through numerical modelling of the problem, resulting in some extremely interesting images of the impact of rings with the free surface, which can be related to back to the project work done. Figure 4.2 shows what can be considered as one of the major findings in this work, the evolution of the vortex ring as it approaches and meets the free surface. Yue states, "The key to understanding the mechanism of vortex connection at a free surface is the surface layers": a viscous layer, and a thicker blockage layer.
More recently, work on vortex rings has been far more specific and technically complicated. This is due to the fact that the basics of vortex rings were understood by the end of the 1980s, and with computer advancement in the 1990s, more complex ideas could be explored.
Much of the previous work on vortex rings is either based on experimental data or numerical modelling. However, there seems to be a lack in a combination of the two. This may be due to the fact that in order to do this, a specialisation in both computer and practical techniques would be needed. It is important to draw on both models and real-life tests because an effective computer model represents a fairly good understanding of the topic at hand. However, to know that it is an effective model, it should be compared to what actually happens. An example of this is the above Figure 4.2. From observation during this project, the figure can be seen to be visually fairly representative of the true situation, however there is little reference to this within Yue 's paper. One paper that makes good use of a comparison between experimental and numerical studies is by Nitsche and Krasny, who, as stated before, produce a startlingly realistic model of the formation of a vortex ring at the end of a cylinder.
Many of the experimental studies given use similar apparatus in order to do the same experiments, a piston-cylinder-nozzle arrangement is used. Glezer made an attempt to standardise this in 1988, as stated previously, by which time many of these similar experiments had been done. It would have seemed wise to attempt to standardise this at an earlier date. In Maxworthy 's 1977 paper 'Some experimental studies of vortex rings', a number of different apparatus set-ups are used in different locations. This is explained by the statement that it a "certain unique piece of apparatus existed at each one (location) that could not be conveniently reassembled or manufactured in a common place." (Maxworthy, 1977) Even though this is understandable due to time and money constraints, it could have been an opportunity to standardise this apparatus, due to the relevance and scale of the reports submitted by Maxworthy.
Even though some of this material is covered in the literature review, it seems wise to clarify important theory that has a relation to the project topic.
A vortex ring is a toroidal shaped ring, which in this project is considered to be axi-symmetric. Lim and Nickels define a vortex ring as a "bounded region of vorticity in a fluid in which vortex lines form closed loops.".
Vortex rings can be formed by forcing a volume of fluid out of a nozzle. This is shown in Figure 5.1. (from 'A numerical study of vortex ring formation at the edge of a circular tube).
The reason that this method produces a vortex ring is that "the flow separates at the edge of the orifice and a cylindrical vortex sheet forms and rolls up into a vortex ring." (Glezer, 1988).
Variables in this formation process are the nozzle diameter, the turning angle of the nozzle, the piston stroke length, and the piston velocity.
If the fluid being fired out of the nozzle is the same as the fluid being fired into, then the rings produced will not be seen without an addition form of visualisation. This could be achieved by adding neutrally buoyant flow visualisation particles to the fired fluid, however in most experiments a neutrally buoyant dye is often injected into the stream at the end of the nozzle.
The research strategy to find information relevant to the project was to initially ask supervisors for recommended reading. This basic recommended reading was then studied in order to find specific terms that needed to be researched in order to further the project. This research was carried out using a Library search page in order to search available journals for the subject. An additional literature search was done on Google Scholar. If any other points of interest arose through the course of the project these were also researched.
It is easy to recognise, almost after reading the summary, whether a particular article was relevant to the specification of the project. However, it was often worth looking through less relevant articles in order to obtain a greater background to the project. If the article was relevant, it was read through and then highlighted in order to identify information that was pertinent to the project specification.
In this section the experimental equipment used will be identified and discussed.
An existing vortex ring generator and tank was used for experimentation. The initial design was conceived by Peter Thomas, and then refined by John Roe. It started use in early 2004. A schematic sketch of the facility is shown in Figure 7.1.
It is also shown in the following photo, Figure 7.2.
A frame was made to go inside the tank, and then act as a device to mount subsequent apparatus to. It was made out of wood, due to weight and cost requirements, and was varnished in order to reduce any water damage that may occur. An illustration of this frame is shown, in Figure 7.3.
It can also be seen in part in the following photo, Figure 7.4.
The wooden frame was clamped to the top of the tank in order to prevent any possible movement.
The only flaw that was found during use was that even though varnish had been used, the frame still expanded and warped to a certain extent, making it difficult in some circumstances to fit particular apparatus.
Vortex rings were generated using a piston and nozzle, and visualised using a dye.
The piston is shown in Figure 7.5.
The dye is stored in three small tanks, and then pumped using a peristaltic pump to a reservoir connected to the nozzle.
The piston operates at a speed of 0 v =50cm/s, and throughout experimentation speeds of 5, 10, 15, 20, 30 and 50cm/s were used, along with piston displacement distances of 3, 6, 9, and 12cm. Therefore, in each set of experiments 24 readings were taken. These values were chosen due to the fact that they represent a large cross-section of possible results.
The piston movement is controlled via a computer using the program, Motion Planner. The ejection of dye is controlled by a timer which when started ejects a 3 second pulse of the fluid. This is shown in Figure 7.8.
A fair amount of time went into experimentation to find a neutrally buoyant dye mixture, which would visualise the vortex rings without affecting their properties.
Two different dyes were used: food colouring and fluorescein.
Fluorescein is a fluorescent dye that reacts to UV, and glows a green-yellow, allowing for efficient visualisation. However, it was found after experimentation that a fully saturated solution was not neutrally buoyant. Ethanol was then added and the mixture was again tested by placing a drop, using a pipette, into a glass of stationary water to check that the drop did not rise to the top, or sink to the bottom. From this test a suitable mixture was found. However, when this mixture was used in actual experimentation, large density effects were noticed.
Blue food colouring proved to be more successful. Initially a suitably neutral density was found through calculation, however as with fluorescein, this did not work in practice. Instead, a mixture of ratio 50:50:5 (Water:Dye:Ethanol) suggested by Brend (2006) was improved to 50:55:5, and any buoyancy effects were reduced to a high extent.
Two cameras were mounted on the side of the tank. The signal from these were combined and displayed as a split-screen on a television. A counter was also displayed on the television for time reference purposes. This display was recorded on a Super VHS video recorder, which allowed for frame-by-frame playback.
The cameras are shown in Figure 7.9, showing how the fields of view are set up so as to show the ring moving from one screen to the next instantaneously.
The cameras and televisions are also shown in Figures 7.10, and 7.11.
The top television displays an output from a camera pointing at the piston, so as to illustrate its position.
The purpose of the cameras was to firstly record any significant effects, and secondly to allow an accurate reading of time to be taken, for example, ejection time.
In this section the set up and experimental procedure will be discussed.
At the beginning of every day of experimentation, the tank and dye reservoirs had to be filled, and the power turned on. For calibration and reference purposes a measuring stick was placed inside the tank and captured on a short section of video. A plate with experiment title and date was also captured by the same method.
At the end of every day of experimentation, the tank and dye reservoirs were emptied.
During experimentation three different values needed to be recorded. These were the time at which the vortex ring was ejected, the time at which the vortex ring destroyed, and the distance from the nozzle that the vortex ring destroyed. The values of time needed to be defined in order to be consistent throughout experimentation.
Ejection Time: The first instance in which the movement of the forming of a vortex ring is noticed.
Destroy Time: There were many different ways that the vortex rings were destroyed during experimentation, and so the following events would indicate a destroy time.
Errors in the destroy time could occur due to the following factors.
The distance from the nozzle that that vortex ring has decayed at was recorded in two different ways. If the vortex ring was visible on the television screen at its point of decay, then this point could be compared to the initial calibration, and the distance noted. However, if the ring was not in the field of view of the cameras then it was recorded by comparison to a distance marker attached to the tank. The television method is more accurate and depends much less on personal judgement, yet it was not often possible. The second method was still considered to be accurate to roughly +/- 1cm, due to parallax errors, and personal judgement. This method is still seen to be a suitable method, due to the impracticality of other methods such as using more than 2 cameras in order to cover a larger recording range.
In order to experiment, appropriate parameters for piston velocity and piston stroke length needed to be programmed into Motion Planner. It would then need to be checked that the piston was in its starting position, as illustrated by the top television screen or a particular command in the program. Also, it would need to be checked that the water inside the tank was steady, so as not to interfere with the movement of the generated ring. Then the record button on the VCR could be pressed, following by an appropriate number of bursts of dye using the dye timer. Finally the 'go' command could be executed in the program in order to move the piston and hence generate a vortex ring.
Once the vortex ring is generated its movements and actions can be noted, and at the point in which it destroys the recording of the VCR could be stopped. The reason for this is to record the noted destroy time. The destroy distance would then be noted, or calculated later on from the video recording.
This process is then repeated until all the appropriate data has been acquired.
It was found that analysis of the video to find ejection and decay times could be done in between sets of data in the time in which it takes for the tank water to settle.
The initial concept to illustrate the importance of a nearby free surface was through the use of a Perspex tube to simulate a smaller tank. However this was relatively unsuccessful in achieving what was intended. Therefore an alternative means of investigating the same principle of wall influence was identified as the use of a single flat plate, with a varying distance from the piston, in order to investigate its influence on the movement of the vortex rings produced.
A long sheet of Perspex was found to use as a wall. It was suitable because it was long enough to run almost along the whole length of the tank. It was also suitable because it was transparent, and hence it was possible to see any collisions of the ring on the wall from the opposite side that it happened.
Due to an unreliability of the wooden frame within the tank, it was decided to mount the proposed wall onto the tank itself, on two parallel bars running above it. In order to do this, a metal bracket was used, and fixed onto the sheet of Perspex. This bracket was then mounted to the top the tank. It was designed so as to allow the plate to get as close to the centre of the piston as possible, the minimum distance being 50mm.
The aim of these experiments was to determine when the wall started to have an influence on the movement of the vortex rings produced. It was predicted that if the wall were close enough to the piston then the ring would start moving towards it, eventually hitting it.
It was believed that this influence would occur because the side of the vortex ring closest to the wall would suffer interference from it and then slow down as a result. This reduction in speed of one side would mean that the ring would start to tilt in the direction of the wall, and therefore move closer to it. As the ring moved towards the wall it would suffer this influence to an increasing extent, until it finally collides with it. This predicted influence is illustrated in Figure 9.1.
Five different wall distances were investigated, 50mm, 65mm, 84mm, 105mm, and 135mm. Where 50 and 135 are the minimum and maximum possible distances respectively. These values were chosen mainly on the convenience of fitting the wall onto the frame in these positions, due to obstructions present. However this conveniently produced a good distribution of values.
It was expected that as the wall distance was increased, the effect that the vortex rings would 'feel' would decrease. This is because if the wall is closer then more vortex lines will be interrupted by the wall surface, and so the interaction would increase.
A complete table of the all the collated results is shown in Appendix 1.
In addition to these the diameter of the vortex rings produced was thought to be dependent at formation on the piston velocity and the piston stroke length. Therefore, an experiment was done to measure the diameter of the vortex ring produced under the 24 variations of piston velocity and stroke length. Fluoroscein dye was used with a vertical sheet of light in order to photograph a slice of the ring. This slice enabled the two cores to be identified much more readily. The distance between the cores was then calculated in an image program, ImageJ.
On ejection from a nozzle, vortex rings take about a distance of three ring diameters to properly form, these vortex rings also grow in size as their distance from the nozzle increases. It was therefore decided that as long as the distance that the photographs were taken was constant, a fairly good comparison of ring diameters would be formed. This assumes however, that the ring diameter grows at a standard rate, or that the difference in growth rates in negligible.
The photographs of different ring diameters are shown in Figure 9.2.
A normalised table of the ring diameters is shown in Appendix 2.
From observation of the ring diameter results it can be seen that as the piston velocity was increased the diameter of the ring would increase. This is because as the velocity increases, impulse of the piston increases. The result of this is that a higher circulation is produced, which in turn increases the vorticity distribution within the ring formed (Gharib, 1998), thereby creating a larger diameter ring.
Figure 9.3 illustrates this.
As the piston velocity increases, the diameter of the ring, for varying stroke lengths, increases at a decreasing rate. It seems that a maximum diameter is reached at a piston velocity of roughly 30 cm/s, after which the diameter decreases slightly.
This graph is possibly showing that a maximum diameter is reached at these high piston speeds of 30 and 50 cm/s. However, results using a higher piston velocity still would be needed to confirm this assumption. This indicates that a maximum vorticity can be reached, as supported by Gharib.
Figure 9.3 also shows that as the Piston Stroke Length is increased the diameter of the ring also increases. This is shown to a fuller extent in Figure 9.4.
The reason that Piston Stroke Length influences ring diameter is that as it increases the impulse of the piston increases, thereby increasing the vorticity distribution as discussed before.
It should be noted that even though different combinations of piston velocity and piston stroke length may produce the same diameter vortex ring, it does not mean that the similar sized vortex rings share the same characteristics. For instance, the diameter of the core may be different, as may the speed that the ring moves, and the circulation of fluid within the ring. This is because the rings were produced by differing impulse values.
As the diameter of the ring is increased it is logical to think that the distance from a fixed wall to the nearest edge of the ring would decrease. This is illustrated in Figure 9.5.
As the ring is closer to the wall, more interaction will take place. This will mean that as the diameter is increased the rings will move towards the wall at a higher rate. For example, this may occur to such an extent that a ring which at a smaller diameter may be destroyed by turbulence, would at a higher diameter be destroyed through impact with the wall.
A graph of this is shown in Figure 9.6.
A distinct correlation can be seen between the diameter of ring, and the destroy length, when the wall is either 50 or 65 mm away, where as the diameter of ring increases, the destroy length decreases. However, for a wall distance of 84 or 105mm any correlation is much less distinct. A reason that 84mm has less correlation than 105mm, may be that two sets of results for 84mm have been included. This may account for an extra spread of data vertically due to the possibility of slightly different experimental conditions.
The dependence of destroy length on ring diameter can be understood more fully, through manipulation of the data so as to combine wall distance and diameter of ring. This has been achieved by subtracting half the ring diameter, i.e. the radius from the centre of the ring core to the centre of the ring, from the wall distance, in order to give the distance of the ring core from the wall.
The resulting graph, Figure 9.7, is shown.
Control experiment results for destroy length have been included, where the rings have decayed without any influence from any wall etc. The control experiments are taken in the tank where the wall distance is assumed to be an infinite distance away, thereby it would be impossible to show this on a graph. All the values have therefore been placed at a distance of 14 cm away for simple comparison purposes. Also, all of the control results lie on a vertical line, this is because although the diameter of the ring still changes in the control, the change in distance is negligible from a wall an infinite distance away. The control has been included to show the distribution of results that decay naturally.
The points have been labelled under their corresponding wall distances for reference purposes.
There is a large amount of correlation for the results corresponding to wall distances of 50 and 65mm. This shows that for low wall distances, the destroy length increases linearly as the distance from the ring core to the wall increases. However, there is little correlation in the remaining data series. However, enough correlation is present to know that the correlation gets less as the distance of the core from wall increases, as there is a slight positive skew for the 84 and 105mm results.
The inclusion of control results allows for comparison between the distribution of points in the control set and the 135mm set. It seems that the 135mm is tending towards a distribution similar to the control set, where the distance of the ring core from the wall has little effect on the destroy length of the rings. An interpretation of this could be that at 135mm the wall has only a small effect on the rings, and is nearing the limit at which the wall will have an effect. However, these results alone do not show at what distance a wall will have an effect.
The effects of the walls at varying distances on the rings have been observed. These include whether the ring did not appear to be affected by the wall, whether the ring drew towards the wall, or whether the ring hit the wall. These results are shown as follows.
It can be seen that as the wall distance increases, the number of rings hitting the wall decreases to an extent, drawing towards the wall rather than actually hitting it. The reason for this is because before the ring hits the wall, it decays through turbulence etc. instead, yet they would have hit the wall if they had not decayed. This can still be considered as the rings being affected by the wall, as it has altered their otherwise vertical motion.
A further experiment was done in order to investigate the effect that varying the wall distance had on the velocity profile of the vortex rings produced. Velocity profiles were calculated for 3 different situations. A control was done which assumed that the wall was an infinite distance away from the vortex rings, i.e. using the tank with no additional wall in place. Then experiments were done when the wall was 65mm and 105mm away from the vortex rings.
These experiments were done by initially calibrating the tank using a measuring stick, and then marking distances away from end of the nozzle of the vortex ring generator. Hence, the time in seconds to get to the distances 10, 13, 16, 19, 22, 25, 40, 45, 50, 55, 60, 65, and 70cm was recorded through use of the television screens.
It was expected that the ring velocities would be affected to a fairly high extent by the presence of a nearby free surface. This was predicted to happen for two reasons. Firstly, the presence of the free surface would significantly slow down the side of the ring nearest to the wall. This is the effect that is identified in previous sections, and is responsible for a change in direction of the ring, altering its course towards the wall. A second reason is in part due to the first reason, and is also due to experimental constraints that are unavoidable with the apparatus. This is that in recording the distance that the ring has travelled, at the set of distances above, the vertical displacement of the ring that is being recorded. This therefore does not take into account the horizontal displacement of the ring. It can therefore be considered in the results where a large effect of the wall is noticed, that the ring has travelled a slightly greater distance than recorded.
A table of velocity profiles for the control and wall distances of 64mm and 105mm are shown in Appendix 3.
In order to show this data effectively, it has been decided to plot four graphs, each one representing a piston velocity of 15cm/s, and the four graphs representing the four piston stroke lengths of 3, 6, 9, and 12cm. It is believed that these four graphs give an effective representation of the relationship between wall distance and velocity profile for all piston velocities. One of these graphs is shown in Figure 9.8, however, the remaining three are shown in Appendix 4.
From Figure 9.8, and also the graphs contained in Appendix 4, that the velocity profile for a vortex ring near a wall changes to a negligible degree as the distance from the wall is increased. This therefore indicates that the vortex rings slow down very little as a consequence of the wall being in place, when it was expected that they would slow down a large amount.
One additional problem was found in determining the velocity profiles, in that it was only possible to compare wall distances of 105mm and infinity to the 64mm wall distances over a small distance scale. This is because in most cases the vortex ring hit the wall before a full set of 64mm distances could be obtained. However, it can be seen that this distance scale is on the whole adequate for the purpose of comparing velocity profiles of the different free surface situations.
In theory it would have been possible to do an additional experiment to calculate the horizontal and vertical displacement of a vortex ring under the effect of a free surface. A possible consequence of this is that a relationship could be formed of the distance travelled in both x and y directions over time. Which would, in turn, illustrate the actual form of the movement of a ring towards a wall.
This section contains additional observations from the experiments not contained within the previous sections.
During the destroy time/length experiments with a wall distance of 50 mm, it was noticed that after firing, the side of the vortex ring closest to the wall would start to slow down, while the furthest away side continued at a relatively faster speed. The result of this was that the vortex ring started to turn towards the wall and eventually hit it, as stated previously. However, after the first side of the ring hit the wall, the time for the second side to hit was surprising quick. This could be because the first side is slowed down abruptly and has only a small amount downward momentum, yet the second side has a large amount of downward momentum and a small sideways (towards the wall) momentum. It could be seen that the ring diameter stayed constant, and so when the first side stopped, most of the second side 's momentum was converted to a rotational direction about the first side. This therefore meant that the second side hits the wall at a faster speed than it would have otherwise. This is illustrated in the Figure 9.9.
One unusual observation was taken in the second set of data for the wall being 50 mm away, for the case of v = 5, d = 3. It was unusual because it hit the wall off centre, which may have been due to a background rotation in the tank of water. However, after it hit the wall it formed a U shape, like a horseshoe. A photo of this is shown in Figure 9.10.
Figure 9.10 bears a striking resemblance to part (e) of Figure 4.2, thereby indicating the effectiveness of Zhang 's model.
In Figure 9.10 the side of the vortex ring which hit the wall initially, broke rather than going turbulent as would be expected. This is abnormal because according to the Helmholtz Vortex theorem, a vortex tube cannot end within a fluid (Kundu, Fluid Mechanics). A possible explanation of this is that the ring lost all of its momentum after it hit the wall, and so remained stationary. If the momentum had been higher then the vortices may have reconnected or formed secondary vortices, yet in this circumstance it seems that there was not enough energy to do so.
For a wall distance of 84 mm, and the case of v =10, d = -6, a strange effect was observed. As the vortex ring was drawn towards the wall, the side nearest to it became turbulent before it hit the wall. This happened a fraction of a second before the second side became turbulent. This means that the interaction between the wall and the ring is large enough to trigger an instability of such a magnitude as to produce turbulence, even if a collision has not occurred.
Two sets of data were taken for a wall distance of 50 mm. The results for each set were recorded in slightly different ways. This was because in the first set it was noticed that after the vortex rings hit the wall, a cloud of dye was formed with no coherent structure, yet it still had a velocity. The destroy time in this case was therefore taken to be the time at which this cloud stopped moving. However, halfway through this first set it was realised that the results were subject to a large amount of personal judgement and therefore error. Hence, in the second set of data it was decided to take the destroy time as the point at which the ring hit the wall instead which seemed to give more accurate and repeatable results.
For a wall distance of 84 mm, two sets of data were taken under the same condition, yet at different sides of the piston. This was in order to check that any movement of a ring apparently towards a wall was not due to an inaccuracy within the tank. The two sets of 84mm data correlate well with one another, which implies that there was n't an inaccuracy present within the tank.
One inaccuracy in the flat plate experiments was that the plate was not completely flat. The centre of mass of the plate set up was tested, and it was believed that enough force could be exerted on the top of the plate by clamps in order to keep it vertical. However, at the bottom of the plate was a bend most probably due to its previous loading or storage, which bent away from the direction of the piston. This is illustrated in Figure 9.11.
The plate 's deflection can be considered as insignificant until the last 20 cm or so. However, a number of rings i.e. for v = 50 cm/s, and d = 12 cm, and other high values of v and d, travel far enough down the tank to experience this wall deflection. During experimentation the rings only reached to the bottom of the plate if v and d were high and the wall distance was 135 mm. Even though, the deflection of the plate was present, these rings still hit. However, it can be seen that they may have hit the plate further up the plate if the deflection had not been present.
The initial idea for this project was to use Perspex tubes in order to simulate tanks of differing diameters. It was decided to use a tube of 120mm internal diameter, due to the fact that this was the approximate diameter of a vortex ring. It was thought that once experiments had been done on this size, it would be easy to recognise whether to increase or decrease diameters in order to get interesting results.
A clamp system was designed and produced that would securely hold the relatively heavy Perspex tube. It was designed so that it could simply slot onto the frame, so as to allow it to be fitted while the tank was filled with water, without getting into it. However, this proved to be difficult due to warping of the frame in the water, which meant that it did not fit correctly. This had some fairly significant consequences for experimenting on the tube. Firstly, the tank would have to be empty of water in order to position the tube, which meant larger times to complete a set of experiments. Secondly, it was noted that during experiments the water within the tube got highly concentrated with dye, which could have been rectified by taking the tube out and putting it back in again. Siphoning the water out of the tube, and replacing this back into the main bulk of water in the tank instead solved the problem of dye build up. Thirdly, and most importantly, when the tube was fitted it was not possible to position it concentric to the piston. This meant that one section of the wall had a larger influence on the behaviour of the ring, affecting the experiment to a high extent.
The following is a photo of the Perspex Tube, with clamps attached, Figure 10.1.
The following is a photo of dye build-up within the tube, Figure 10.2.
The most major problem that occurred in use of the tube was that in use without the tube, the firing of the piston would not create a enough vertical movement in the bulk of water to affect the vortex rings. However, due to the low volume of the tube, the piston had a very large effect on the water within it. The result was a vertical movement of all the water in the tube, with a frequency of about 4? radians/sec and estimated amplitude of 5cm. This thereby affected the movement of the vortex rings to a very high extent, creating a  'stop and start' motion.
Results for this experiment are not particularly useful because most of the rings hit the wall straight away at the same location. The results obtained are shown in Appendix 5.
Two sets of results were obtained for the 120mm tube under the same conditions. The values recorded were Destroy Time and Destroy Length, for the same values of piston velocity and piston stroke length as used in the flat plate experiments. Due to the correlation found between an increase in piston velocity and piston stroke length in relation to the diameter of ring produced these values were also included in the table in Appendix 5.
In order to investigate the effect that the tube had on destroy length of the vortex rings produced, the diameter of the rings were plotted against destroy length. This is shown in Figure 10.3.
Firstly, it can be seen that the first and second set of data are fairly similar. This implies that the experiment is surprisingly repeatable, even though the large oscillations were present in the fluid of the tube.
Secondly, it can be seen that as the diameter of the ring increases the destroy length decreases. A critical point can also be seen in the region of a diameter of ring of about 5.5 cm. It seems that if the diameter of the ring is less than this then its destroy length will be much larger.
This graph can be split up into individual sets of piston stroke lengths, Figure 10.4.
This reveals that the rings that were created using a stroke length of 3 cm, managed to survive the longest, whereas all other stroke lengths hit the wall in roughly the same region.
Overall, no significant conclusions can be drawn from this data due to its inaccuracy in terms of nozzle and tube concentricity.
The fact that the tube and piston were not concentric to one another was a foreseen possible problem in this experiment, however the design taken to prevent it proved to not be adequate. If this were to be repeated in the future, a completely rigid frame, preferably of metal would need to be produced, so as to prevent warping.
Problems with a build up of dye within the tube, and of fluctuations within the tube were not foreseen, and would have been difficult to prevent. The build up of dye could be reduced if the frame was rigid, as the tube could be taken out, and replaced much more easily than with the wooden frame. Also, holes could be drilled in the tube to allow dye to escape, however this may affect the movement of the vortex ring, and as the fluid is stationary within the tank, it is unlikely that the dye would escape the tube even with the holes in place. A degree of experimentation would need to be done in order to reduce fluctuation within the tube. This would need to be done in order to determine what actually causes the large oscillation of fluid. One possible reason is that because the top of the tube is above the water line for the rest of the tank, the tube acts as a tank with one end open. This means that water is pushed out of the bottom of the tube, creating a pressure difference between the tube and the rest of the tank. This pressure difference then has to be equalised, and so water from the tank moves back into the tube with enough force to produce another pressure difference. This pressure difference then attempts to equalise itself, pushing water out of the tube once more, creating a cycle of oscillation with slowly decreasing amplitude. This is illustrated simply in Figure 10.5.
A possible way to rectify this situation would be to place the top of the tube under the water line of the rest of the tank, thereby creating a open-ended tank, the fact that there are two ways for fluid to enter and exit the tube, may reduce the oscillation effect.
If these problems were resolved a good set of results would be likely to be produced. However, in some ways the fact that this did n't work and the flat plate method was used instead was beneficial. The reason for this is that if the tube were concentric to the piston then the interactions of the vortex rings on the wall would be constant around the whole ring circumference. Therefore, the effects noticed would be in the form of a changed velocity profile for the ring. Any change in velocity profile is in some ways more difficult to recognise than the case for a flat plate. This is because a slight change in vortex ring speed is much less noticeable than a vortex ring hitting a wall or not.
It is important to consider the total cost that this project has produced, not only in terms of materials purchased, but also in terms of the significant amount of time that has been spent on this project, both by the author, associated academics, and technicians.
At least 300 hours has been spent on this project by the author, including research, design, experimentation, analysis, and writing up. At a tariff of   15 per hour this gives a cost of at least   4500. For every day spent experimenting, at least 1.5 hours was spent under the supervision of a PhD student, . If a rough tariff of   35 per hour is applied, this gives an approximate cost of   2625, assuming, modestly, about 75 hours involvement. Meetings were also held with a project supervisor, . If a tariff of   50 per hour is applied, an approximate cost of   1250 is reached, assuming 25 hours involvement. Technicians were consulted for technical advise throughout the course of the project, and equipment designed was also made by them. Assuming 50 hours work at a tariff of   20 per hour, an approximate cost of   1000 is reached. These aforementioned staff costs add up to an approximate value of   9375. If the materials used for manufacture, and consumables are given a value of   100, then the total cost for the project is   9475.
The benefit of this project to any stakeholders in it is purely the knowledge gained from it. This is because there is not really any commercial value in the project, as there is little at this time that could be sold or produced as a result of it. However, the knowledge acquired from it may give rise to further experiments that would not have been thought of before the project was done. These experiments may possibly yield benefits.
The benefits of this project to the author as an individual are high. This is because it has given knowledge and practice in many aspects of engineering. This includes an increased knowledge of how and the best ways to research, how to plan a project effectively, how to produce and analyse data effectively, and finally how to write up a results in an appropriate format. These benefits will be of great use in a future job in engineering, or many other career paths.
A large number of experiments were completed which varied the distance of a wall from the piston. Also, an experiment was done related to wall distance that investigated the diameter of vortex rings under different piston conditions; piston velocity and piston stroke length.
It was proved that as the piston velocity was increased, the diameter of the vortex rings increased at a decreasing rate, until a maximum was reached at about 30 cm/s for piston velocity. Likewise, as piston stroke length was increased, the diameter of the vortex rings increased at a slightly decreasing rate.
It was also discovered that as that as piston velocity and piston stroke length were increased, and the subsequent ring diameter increased, the destroy length for the two closest walls, decreased. This happens because as the diameter of the rings increases, the distance to the wall decreases, thereby increasing the interaction between the rings and the wall. However, as the wall distances increase, correlation between ring diameters and destroy length decreases to a high extent. However, a slight negative skew can still be seen. In order to illustrate any correlation to a higher extent, a small calculation was done in order to find the distance between the ring core and the wall. This value was then plotted against destroy length. A large amount of correlation was seen for results for 50mm and 65mm, however this correlation decreased vastly for further away walls. A possible reason for this is that as the distance from the wall to the core of the ring increases, the distance that the ring has to travel before hitting the wall increases. Therefore, the ring may still be affected to a high extent but other mediums of ring decay will be given a greater opportunity to affect the ring movement such as the transition from laminar to turbulent.
Observations of under which conditions the rings hit the wall, were drawn towards the wall, or were not affected by the wall were taken. It was discovered that as the wall distance increases, the number of rings hitting the wall decreases to an extent, drawing towards the wall rather than actually hitting it. The reason for this is because before the ring hits the wall, it decays through turbulence etc. instead, yet they would have hit the wall if they had not decayed. This can still be considered as the rings being affected by the wall, as it has altered their otherwise vertical motion. At the higher wall distances, a proportion of the rings did not appear to be affected by the wall. This shows that at these distances the wall does has a greatly reduced effect on the rings produced when compared to the closer wall distances.
It can therefore be concluded that the tank does have a large enough diameter to be considered as an infinite distance away from the piston centre. When the wall is placed 135mm away from the piston centre, a significant percentage of the rings are still affected in some way by the presence of a wall. If the wall distance was increased any more then no rings would hit the wall, but a small number may still draw towards it to an extent. This therefore implies if the distance of the wall from the piston is increased further, i.e. to a distance equal to the wall of the tank, then no effect will be witnessed. The certainty of this conclusion could be improved greatly through further experimentation with a greater wall distance in order to check that no influence exists. This was not possible in this case though due to obstructions present.
Due to inaccuracies within the 120mm tube experiment no significant conclusions have be drawn. However, the experiments would prove useful as a precursor to any additional investigations using the same apparatus, due to the fact that flaws identified can be repaired in future designs.
The specification for the project has been met to a fairly high extent. This is due to the fact that it has provided evidence to suggest that the tank has a large enough diameter so as not to affect the movement of vortex rings produced within it. However, further experimentation would be needed in order to state this to a high degree of certainty.
I would like to extend my thanks to and who have played a major role in the supervision of this project. Also, to those in the laboratories, , , and numerous other technicians.
