Undoubtedly, there are many companies that provide interesting case-studies for a discussion of their strategic marketing planning and the way that they have affected or been affected by the international marketing environment, its changes and its trends. Toyota with the implementation of Lean Manufacturing and Motorola with the adoption of Six Sigma principles are only two of the most well-known examples.
However, this assignment is based on easyJet, a European Airline Industry which, by using a pioneering strategy, had a significant impact on the way that European airlines do business.
The current assignment initially examines the company and its strategy. Following on, under the perspective of macro-environment, the main events and trends that have affected the European aviation market are presented and analysed. Moreover, micro-environment of easyJet is defined, and, in order to provide a clearer picture of the company, a SWOT analysis is presented. Furthermore, possible future events and trends and the way that marketeers should respond to them are examined and lastly, the conclusions drawn up from this analysis are set out.
According to the official web-site of easyJet (), Stelios Haji-Ioannou founded the company and the family still remains the main shareholder. He is also responsible for some other easyGroup companies such as easyInternetcaf  , easyMoney.com and easyHotel.com and although there are some "cross-marketing" agreements, easyJet operates independently.
Gilligan and Wilson (2003, p. 490) mention that Mr. Haji-Ioannou based his policy on the low-cost US carrier, Southwest Airlines, considering how he could reinvent the airline operations practice. Focused on the low-cost company 's ethos, he based easyJet at Luton (lower labour costs and airport fees than Heathrow or Gatwick) and whenever possible, he chose as easyJet 's destinations, less busy secondary airports in Europe.
EasyJet has been always focused on eliminating any unnecessary costs and thus able to keep costs low by various ways. According to Gilligan and Wilson (2003, pp. 490-491) and to easyJet 's official web-site, the ways of implementing its strategy are:
Specific aircraft type (Boeing 737 and Airbus A319, which are interchangeable on all easyJet routes).
Maximization of aircraft utilization. Instead of flying for 6 hrs/day (industry average), each easyJet 's aircraft flies on average of 11.5 hrs/day. Thus, instead of using 3 aeroplanes, easyJet does the same work with 2.
Booking over the Internet. Having used the Internet to sell its first ticket in April 1998, today easyJet sells approximately 95% of all its seats over the Internet.
Ticketless travel. All the transactions between customer and company are made with the use of credit card and the customer only receives a particular reference number, which should be with him at the check-in and of course a valid form of photographic ID. Thus, there is an important reduction on the cost of issuing, distributing, processing and reconciling millions of tickets each year.
Selling drinks and refreshments, instead of offering a free lunch. It is worth mentioning Mr. Haji-Ioannous 's opinion about free lunches: "When someone is on a bus, he does n't expect any free lunch. I could n't see why we cannot educate our customers to expect no frills on board." (Gilligan and Wilson 2003, p. 491).
No travel agents. Instead of using travel agents, easyJet prefers direct sales since agents and computer reservation systems can add 25% to operating costs.
Efficient use of airports with average turnaround times of 25 minutes.
Online check-in and on-site information desk.
One class of seating. On easyJet there are no business class passengers, thus no extra space is needed.
Yield management. easyJet uses a kind of lottery to sell flight seats. The more the demand for a ticket, the higher its price. This strategy has worked very well for easyJet, since a lot of passengers book their tickets well in advance for popular flights, anticipating cheaper tickets. The result of this policy is more than 80% of flights' seats are booked.
Paperless 'office'. The management and administration of easyJet is entirely based on IT systems which ensure great flexibility.
Among the main events and trends that have affected the European Airline Industry, Sweeney N. (2003) focuses on the following ones:
Moreover, the Expansion of the EU to include ten more countries (Economist, 2004), is one more significant event. Lastly, one should not fail to take into account the increasing environmental consciousness among consumers.
Following on, the abovementioned events and trends are going to be analysed under the perspective of Macro-environment.
According to Adcockal. (1998, p. 32) the Macro-Environment consists of uncontrollable variables such as Social, Technological, Economical and Political ones (also known as STEP), which companies have little influence over. 'Social and Life-Style Changes' as well as the increasing 'Environmental Consciousness', can be included to the Social Variables.
Sweeney N. (2003) states that since people nowadays enjoy more free time, their demands for short trips for leisure have increased, leading to increasing sales of low-cost flight tickets. easyJet realised this trend and offers a variety of destinations throughout Europe, although recently it expanded its network to Africa (Morocco). (easyJet 's web-site, [25/10/06]).
During the last decade an increasing number of people have become concerned about green issues. Thus, it is very important for a company 's image to be in accordance with any environmental legislation.
According to DEFRA 's (Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs) official web-site (), European Union Emissions Trading Scheme "...is one of the policies being introduced across Europe to tackle emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases and combat the serious threat of climate change". easyJet seems to be environmentally-focused and through its policy appears to be a strong supporter of EU ETS. easyJet uses brand new aeroplanes - thus reducing fuel consumption-, but also tries flying point-to-point rather than wasting resources on unnecessary connecting flights (easyJet 's web-site, [25/10/06]).
Moreover, according to easyJet-news, this environmental-friendly policy is further promoted by means such as the easyBus express, (a minibus connecting central London and Luton airport) and by encouraging people to use public transport to and from airports (easyJet advertises Stansted and Gatwick express trains by links on its home-page).
The impact of the Internet on the modern aviation market can be included among technological variables.
Internet enabled easyJet to change the traditional way that airlines did business (see 1.2). According to easyJet 's official web-site, Internet is the most "cost-effective distribution channel"; thus, easyJet encourages its customers to use Internet for their transactions.
Price Consciousness can be included among Economical Variables, although it would not be wrong to be also included in Social ones.
Ms Cassani (ex senior executive of BA) claimed that: "The growth of the low-cost airlines shows that people are fed up with paying ridiculously high fares for a short European flight". (Walters J. 2001). In the same article, it is claimed that "travel managers and the self-employed keep an eye on their expenses"; thus easyJet must try to keep its prices low enough in order to be competitive.
Finally, the Deregulation of European Airline Industry and the expansion of EU can be considered as Political Variables.
In December 1992 the European Union deregulated the airline industry. Gilligan and Wilson (2003, p. 490) note that this resulted in an increase of new airlines that tried to enter the new and very promising market without, however, much success. A lot of them quickly faced various problems and by 1996, of the 80 companies that had started up, 60 went bankrupt. Obviously, easyJet was not among them, and taking into account these statistics, its success becomes even more impressive.
The expansion of the EU to include ten new countries -which actually signified ten new potential aviation markets- (Economist, 2004) has created a significant opportunity for easyJet. The flight routes have now increased and easyJet has the chance to enter vigorously to the relatively new market of Central-Eastern Europe.
However, in order to fully examine the marketing environment, one must not fail to take into account the micro-environment of the company.
According to Adcockal. (1998, pp. 34-36) a company 's micro-environment consists of some very important elements such as: The Company, the Competitors, the Suppliers, the Publics, the Marketing Intermediaries and the Customers.
Although in the present assignment some of these elements have already been analysed (e.g. the Company, see 1.1, 1.2), many of them require a further analysis in order to fully describe the marketing environment.
According to easyJet 's official web-site, Boeing (aircraft type: 737) and Airbus (aircraft type: A319) are the main suppliers of easyJet 's aircrafts. Today, easyJet 's fleet consists of 139 aircrafts and at the end of 2007 it will increase to 164. Although Airbus A319 has some significant differences from the Boeing 737 (weight, size and number of seats), easyJet is orientated to use both of these aircrafts in the same way, consistent to its philosophy: "any aircraft, any route".
However, it is believed that easyJet should attract the double amount of its current customers, in order to fill up its new fleet. (Economist, 2004).
As it has been stated before, the deregulation of European Airline Industry resulted in the increase of low-cost airlines. Thus, apart from the traditionally well-established airlines (i.e. KLM, BA) that easyJet had to face, there have been some new competitors too, such as Virgin Express, Ryanair and Air Berlin. In total, there are approximately 60 low-cost airlines struggling to get a share of the European Airline Industry market. (, [25/10/06]).
In the case of an airline industry, the most common intermediary are travel agents. However with easyJet, things are slightly different since it does not use travel agents to promote its product. Instead it uses a direct sales policy through the Internet. Nevertheless, various web-sites that advertise and promote cheap flights could be considered as marketing intermediaries. 'Publics' is one of the most significant elements of Micro-Environment, since public opinion and social trends can affect a company 's policy and reformulate its marketing strategy. easyJet tries to anticipate social trends and to be rather proactive than reactive to forthcoming social changes.
Till now, easyJet 's policy seems to be quite effective since it succeeded in establishing transactions through the Internet -making this policy a trend in the European aviation market- and furthermore, easyJet is focused on implementing environmental legislations (see 2.6), satisfying its consumers' environmental concerns.
Last but definitely not least, customers play a significant role on the Micro-Environment. They become the recipients of any product/ service and the prosperity of companies depends heavily on them.
For easyJet, the target market are people who pay their tickets on their own, regardless of financial or social background (Gilligan and Wilson 2003, p. 492) and easyJet simply focuses on accomplishing what it has actually promised: low fares, safety, quality services and on-time performance.
However, it is commonly stated that easyJet 's customers are more concerned about the price of the ticket, rather than the service itself. Thus, brand loyalty to easyJet is rather rare and it must continuously vie for its market share.
After finishing with the last element of Micro-Environment, the 4P 's implementation on easyJet 's policy will be discussed.
According to Adcockal. (1998, p. 132), '4Ps' is the abbreviation for 'Product', 'Price', 'Place' and 'Promotion'. In order for this assignment to be complete, there must be an analysis of the effect of each of these four elements of marketing mix to the policy of easyJet.
Obviously the 'product' here is nothing more than a flight ticket. It may sound quite simple, but a closer look from the market perspective would reveal that the final product requires the completion of a series of operations. Furthermore, one should examine the reasons that have made this product so popular. Some of them can be found in part 1.2, while others can be found throughout this text. However, it is important to sum up the reasons that have made this product so well-established:
Firstly, the combination of low-price, high safety standards and high quality service.
And secondly, the implementation of innovative policies.
Lambin (2000, p. 570) states that 'price' can be used as a stimulant for demand, while at the same time it can be an important factor for a company 's long-term prosperity.
In the case of easyJet price is an even more crucial factor, since its entire policy depends on low-cost tickets and yield management (see part 1.2). All its competitors offer tempting cheap tickets and seem to follow the same policy, therefore pricing has become an even more difficult element to handle. Nevertheless, the strategy of yield management has proved quite successful till now.
According to Dibbal. (1996, p. 127), 'place' contains "the activities that make products or services available to customers when and where they want to purchase them". easyJet has established the Internet as the 'place' where any financial transaction between the company and the customer must be actualized. As noted above, easyJet sells approximately 95% of flight seats via Internet, minimizing various costs (easyJet 's web-site, [25/10/06]). Thus, it can be stated that easyJet moved the airline business from the traditional "marketplace" to the contemporary "marketspace", moving from the physical to the digital market. (Kotler P. 2000, p. 8).
According to Lambin (2000, p. 620), 'promotion' includes all short-term stimulus, that can offer a boost in sales. Adcockal. (1998, p. 261) add that promotion can also be used to "encourage repeat purchase".
In the case of easyJet, promotion is exclusively accomplished via the Internet. According to its official web-site, easyJet provides a variety of offers to those who choose to book their ticket on-line (i.e. discounted fares, flight transfers, name changes). This is one more reason that explains the 95% of sales of flight seats on-line.
After finishing with the 4P 's and their implementation on easyJet 's case, it is important to continue with a SWOT analysis.
According to Adcockal. (1998, p.333), the main purpose of SWOT analysis is firstly to find important data concerning a company 's strategy and secondly, to classify this data into its main categories; Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats.
Dibbal. (1996, p. 30) suggest that SWOT analysis can provide "a clear picture of the business 's situation and where action is required to maximise opportunities and minimise threats and weaknesses".
A SWOT Analysis for easyJet is presented on the following table:
The past main events and trends of the marketing environment have been already discussed, but what are the possible future events and trends in the market?.
Undoubtedly, environmental issues are critical since an increasing number of people are becoming environmentally sensitive. Thus, it is important for easyJet to implement any future environmental legislation, as an environmental-friendly image can work effectively in promoting easyJet 's sales.
Furthermore, since new airlines will probably try to enter the low-cost airline market (i.e. subsidiaries of traditional companies) and the majority of easyJet 's customers could not be characterised as brand loyal, easyJet must not only continue offering high-quality services at the same price, but also it must find ways to deter this entrance.
In addition, Dibbal. (1996, p. 53) suggest that it is crucial for market leaders to keep a balance between protecting their existing position and searching for a new market share. If one examines easyJet as part of easyGroup, one could realise that Mr. Haji-Ioannou has tried to implement the strategy of keeping its market position and trying to find new market shares using easyGroup 's companies (new products/ services).
However, entering a new market with a new product or service is not always the safest 'path' for a company 's future development, although this strategy possibly has the greatest potentials.
Finally, from the SWOT analysis, it is obvious that easyJet should take full advantage of its Strengths and try to make the most of its Opportunities. Its established policy and the fact that its flights cover a big part of Europe could play an important role for its future growth. At the same time however, the fact that most of the airlines use yield management to increase their sales it is probably a drawback. Moreover, taking into account that the European aviation market is very competitive, one could argue that the future potential of the company is not so promising.
According however to Sweeney N. (2003, pp. 12-13), there are still great potentials for the airlines due to the fact that many European markets (esp. Central and Eastern Europe) are still quite unexploited. Moreover, he states that.
All these contradictory data make marketeers' task even more difficult. However, what it is considered very important for easyJet 's potential growth is:
The conclusions drawn from this research can be set out by answering two questions that have probably come up.
One may wonder why easyJet performed so well, especially when so many other airlines went bankrupt. The British Chartered Institute of Marketing have defined marketing as, "...the management process responsible for identifying, anticipating and satisfying customer 's requirements profitably." (Adcockal. 1998, p.3).
It is clear that easyJet succeeded because it effectively implemented the aforementioned definition. easyJet identified people 's need to travel inexpensively, anticipated the demand for affordable tickets and eventually satisfied customers' needs. It foresaw a 'market gap' and although it promoted a rather common 'product' (flight ticket), the 'philosophy' and the operations that lay behind it were particularly innovative.
Furthermore, according to Proctor (2000, p. 16) "An important dimension to strategic market management is to be proactive rather than simply reactive to environmental change". easyJet achieved its goals by an efficient proactive strategy and managed to remain a market leader by putting into effect various innovative strategies. It also managed to keep up with the different social trends (i.e. green issues) and in some way, easyJet promoted in Europe the trend of booking flight tickets on-line.
Secondly, one may wonder how easyJet managed to become one of the market leaders in such a competitive environment. According to Proctor (2000, p. 2), "Competition involves finding a different way to satisfy customers from other companies in the market place". easyJet accomplished this, by reforming the traditional way of doing business and by finding alternative low-cost means of satisfying customers.
Finally, the future development of easyJet will be probably based on the same 'tried and tested' principles. However, the increasingly competitive aviation market necessitates constant vigilance and careful marketing strategy, always taking into account consumers' needs and always seeking the most profitable way to satisfy them.
