'Peak Oil' and climate change are the two most important issues facing today 's society. Action must be taken now in order to successfully mitigate the forecast consequences.
In relation to 'energy future' two possible strategies provide solutions;.
A continued growth rate with no adverse environmental effects is obviously favourable. But is this possible?.
Paul Mobbs is an independent environmental consultant who has explored the data, trends, projections and outcomes surrounding 'Peak Oil' and climate change. His views are largely objective and well researched. He is without doubt, however, an environmentalist; hence the presented facts are on occasion reflecting his own agenda.
Mobbs concludes that the only viable future contingency is a reduction in energy consumption by 75%. In the process evaluation he dismisses nuclear power as viable primarily due to waste management issues. He also suggests that nuclear power could only be maintained, at current levels, for 100 years. This report focuses on proving these assertions wrong by analysing viable energy resources and waste management strategies.
From the critical analysis the following conclusion can be drawn;.
Supplies of uranium suitable for fission are far higher than Mobbs estimate. Fast breeder reactors can utilise other Uranium isotopes, expanding 0.7% uranium usage to a potential 100%.
Thorium is of great abundance in the earths crust (roughly 3x that of uranium) and is a proven nuclear fuel. Operational thorium reactors are well documented; further research and development of this technology would expand possible nuclear fuel resources by a factor of 2.
Maintaining current levels, the total nuclear energy supply will last ~30000 years.
Upon replacing all other energy sources, nuclear power has the potential to power the world for ~1000 years.
Waste management is progressing rapidly, with several methods providing safe long-term solutions. Subduction zone disposal would provide waste disposal in the absolute sense.
Nuclear fission has the potential to act as a  'stop-gap' between 'Peak Oil' and fusion.
Energy is the impetus behind every aspect of modern life. It powers everything from transport to manufacture, providing us with the means to live a life which has been deemed normal by society and fuelled by consumerism and development. The devastating effects of this lifestyle are becoming more apparent each year; events such as Katrina increase public awareness of climate change. However few people acknowledge the significant role they play in the world 's future and furthermore even on realisation of the evidence fail to adapt their lifestyles accordingly. Whilst the world 's population continues to rise and capitalists continue to promote growth and development, disaster looms. 'Peak Oil' and global warming are the two most important issues facing today 's society. Action must be taken now in order to successfully mitigate the forecast consequences.
Recent climate change has been attributed to global warming. 'Global Warming' is the increase in global temperature because of natural processes and/or the "greenhouse effect". It is the recent increase in the greenhouse effect for which humans are responsible as a result of increased greenhouse gas emission (mainly water vapour and CO2). If these emissions are not controlled global warming will continue, leading to inevitable global devastation.
Peak Oil is defined as; 1 C. Campbell, ASPO, accessed 7/3/07, source:
Once this maximum is reached the rate of oil production globally will enter a terminal decline. The exact date of peak oil is an unknown; sources suggest peaks between 1996 and 2035, the range owing to variations in values for 'total oil reserves' 2. Irrelevant of when peak oil occurs, new energy sources must be sought to cope with energy consumption. It must also be realised that in light of current climate change issues, peak oil is extraneous because cleaner energy sources must be used to lower CO2 production. Cleaner energy sources include, wind, tidal, solar and nuclear. 2 P. Mobbs, Energy Beyond Oil (2005), Matador Publishing, p42.
Paul Mobbs has researched this dilemma extensively. He began working as an independent environmental consultant in 1992 and more recently his work has engaged in future energy research with particular reference to 'Peak Oil' and sustainable development. His findings are highlighted in his 2005 publication 'Energy Beyond Oil' in which he explores data, trends, projections and outcomes.
One fact is clear; we cannot continue current energy consumption patterns. There are two permissible future strategies;.
Continue growth rates but convert to cleaner energy sources. Low CO2 energy sources presently include renewable energy sources and nuclear fission.
Reduce energy usage significantly (Mobbs concludes a 75% reduction is necessary) 3. 3 P. Mobbs, Energy Beyond Oil, An Introduction (2005) p. 4.
Unfortunately renewable energy sources do not have the capabilities to support the current population and infrastructure. Nuclear fission does but for how long?.
This report will evaluate the conclusions drawn by Mobbs with reference to accuracy and objectivity.
This critical evaluation will be largely centred on the information given in 'Energy Beyond Oil' in relation to the future of nuclear power. This is an integral element to the conclusions drawn by Mobbs; if nuclear power is in fact feasible in the long-term, much of his evaluation will prove redundant.
Nuclear power generation is certainly not without problems. Owing to a history marred by failures, the general public considers it unsafe and adopt a 'not in my back yard' attitude to every aspect of the industry. Opinions can be changed with time and proven good practice. Opinions aside, as Mobbs correctly points out the two potential drawbacks of nuclear power are the waste products and the amount of uranium available. These two issues will shape the future of nuclear power.
As stated by Mobbs, it is certainly true that any non-renewable energy source has a "finite lifetime based on the availability of the mineral resources they are reliant on" 4. At current consumption rates he believes there are "100 years of nuclear fuel left to use"4, with this figure decreasing in proportion to nuclear expansion. The background data for this figure originates from "0.7% of total uranium resource"4 (which is all that is available given current technology). This is a very pessimistic view. With progressive technological improvements and more importantly higher uranium prices, more resources will become available. This is highlighted by the UIC; 4 Energy Beyond Oil, p. 172 5 Uranium Information Centre, Supply of Uranium, UIC Nuclear Issues Briefing Paper # 75 (2006), accessed 12/03/07, source:
Furthermore there was very little uranium exploration between 1985 and 2005. Increased exploration would easily double useable uranium resources. 5.
Fast breeder reactors present massive increases in potential fuel; they give the ability to utilise uranium-238 which comprises the vast majority of natural uranium. Mobbs dismisses the fast breeder technology because of "design limitations" 6. This is a flawed opinion for many reasons; primarily development of fast breeder reactor designs continues, and the technology has already proved successful. Ph  nix, located in the Marcoule nuclear site in France, is a small scale fast breeder reactor which has been connected to the grid since 1973 and continues to generate power 7. 6 Energy Beyond Oil, p. 99 7 IAEA, Ph  nix 30 years of history: the heart of a reactor (2004), source:
Furthermore fast breeder reactors have achieved criticality in locations throughout the world including Dounreay in the UK 8. Future proposals in China and India continue to gain momentum. Of particular interest is the FBR of India which includes to concept of using fertile Thorium 8. The use of thorium in fission reactors is well documented, and interest is increasing worldwide. Thorium is much more abundant than uranium (roughly by a factor of 3) 9 and furthermore is a proven energy source; 8 Wikipedia, the free encyclopaedia, accessed 12/03/07, source: 9 Uranium Information Centre, Thorium, UIC Briefing Paper # 67 (2006), accessed 12/03/07, source:
It is estimated that the use of thorium will provide roughly 18,000 years of power at current energy consumption. 9.
With increases in uranium availability, predicted technological improvements, the use of U-238 and the use of thorium, the potential nuclear fuel supply can be calculated;.
This is far greater than Mobbs' calculated figure owing to belief in fast breeder reactor designs, and thorium. 30000 years may be considered to be very optimistic; however technological advance is an important factor in any calculation. It is not optimistic to suggest that fast breeder reactors will am economic reality within the next 50 years. It must be noted that this figure is for current nuclear energy usage. In order to maintain current electricity demands and replace fossil fuels this value would be reduce by 30 times. This implies that nuclear power has the capacity to power the world for 1000 years.
Irrelative of these figures, the future of nuclear waste management will determine the future of the nuclear industry. Mobbs considers nuclear power a "non-starter... irrespective of reactor technology" 10 since the radioactive waste, as of yet, has proved impossible to manage effectively. 10 Energy Beyond Oil, p. 101.
It is true that waste management is the biggest concern of the nuclear industry and the future of nuclear power. However it must be seen that this power source is relatively new hence waste management is a problem that we are only recently beginning to understand.
With respect to the UK, many regulatory bodies are now in place with the goal of successful waste management. Nirex are currently designing an underground repository for storage of all ILW (Intermediate-Level Waste) and HLW (High-Level Waste) generated in the UK 11. The concept is illustrated in figure 4. This type of facility will rely on proven technology and multiple barriers to protect the environment and the general public. Suitable sites with current, and foreseen, geological stability have been short listed. This concept will provide the UK with a waste management strategy for the future and will also provide guidance for future waste management concepts. This same strategy is being adopted in many other countries including the USA and Finland. 11 UK Nirex, The Nirex Phased Disposal Concept, Nirex Report No. N/074 (2003).
Mobbs states management of HLW as the key issue 10. HLW accounts for a small volume of total radioactive waste, however it accounts for more than 95% of the total radioactivity 12. This presents handling and storage issues which in the past have proved difficult to manage. Progressive research and technological development have produced innovative storage methods which will maintain reliability in the long term. One such method is vitrification, as is employed at Sellafield in the UK. In this process the HLW is bonded into a glass matrix which is pored into steel flasks where it solidifies 13. 12 World Nuclear Association, Radioactive Wastes (2001), accessed 12/03/07, source: 13 Energy Solutions, What is Vitrification (2007), accessed 12/03/07, source:
Vitrification secures the waste for several thousands of years and would be used in conjunction with a deep repository disposal. Other final disposal techniques under consideration include disposal within a subduction zone. This is where the denser of two plates at a destructive plate boundary subducts beneath the earth 's crust. This method has enormous future potential by ensuring absolute waste disposal; locating the waste containers within this zone would ensure "non-return of the material to the biosphere" 14. This would be an international solution and the legality of the method would require worldwide cooperation with reference to "The Law of the Sea" 15. 14 CORWM, Disposal in Subduction Zones (2004), p. 7, accessed 12/03/07, source: 15 Globe Law, UN Law of the Sea Convention (1996), accessed 12/03/07, source:
These techniques and many others in operation or under development are viable solutions to the problem of waste disposal. Furthermore, technological advance will bring evolved solutions with time, particularly in light of recent heightened interest in nuclear energy.
If nuclear power is a long-term energy source, and waste management issues continue to be resolved, then many of the conclusions drawn in 'Energy Beyond Oil' are negated. 'Peak Oil' however, is very much a reality. The real issue will be the movement from reliance on primary energy sources, like oil and gas, to electricity from nuclear fission. This will require world-wide change, but a viable change none the less.
Furthermore fission will allow technological advance to continue at current rates. A reduction in energy usage by 75% will not. Fission could in effect act as an excellent  'stop-gap' to more advanced, cleaner energy sources such as fusion. As Mobbs states "a viable fusion power plant may be fifty to one hundred years away" 16; paired with fission this presents an almost certain energy future. 16 Energy Beyond Oil, p. 101 'Energy Beyond Oil' provides an excellent insight into 'Peak Oil' and the problems faced as we reach peak production. The information presented is informed and accurate; 'Peak Oil' is a factual natural occurrence. Mobbs is correct in basing subsequent evaluation on a future without oil.
Discussions earlier in this report pose the question of why Mobbs is so pessimistic about the role of nuclear energy in the future. Perhaps his views are not as objective as they should be? Mobbs is very critical of the feasibility of radioactive waste management. He bases this largely on lack of proven safeguards, and summarises quoting the RCEP;.
Holding this opinion is contradictory of a point he raises in relation to the development of alternative energy sources; 17 Energy Beyond Oil, p. 166.
This highlights a certain bias towards environmentalist opinions and politics which negates the supposed scientific impact of Mobbs' work. He, in fact, is following a work and research ethic which he concedes is flawed; "The primary difference between the approach of wise use and environment groups is the data that they quote in support of their cause, or to refute their opponents."17.
After evaluation it can be concluded that Mobbs' opinions on radioactive waste disposal and nuclear power are largely subjective and in many cases the data produced is derived from a worst case scenario. It is suggested that the information is presented in such a way, serving as to back-up his personal agenda, where in fact common sense would suggest otherwise.
Mobbs' overall conclusions suggest voluntary energy deprivation; this unfortunately does not take into account greed, and based on previous human behavioural patterns (with the exception of the environmentalist movement) this concept is an impossibility. Unfortunately 'Energy Beyond Oil' is largely a promotion of environmentalism, and possibly permaculture, under the fa  ade of a realistic energy solution.
From the critical analysis the following conclusions can be drawn;.
Supplies of uranium suitable for fission are far higher than Mobbs estimate. Fast breeder reactors can utilise other Uranium isotopes, expanding 0.7% uranium usage to a potential 100%.
Thorium is of great abundance in the earths crust (roughly 3x that of uranium) and is a proven nuclear fuel. Operational thorium reactors are well documented; further research and development of this technology would expand possible nuclear fuel resources by a factor of 2.
Maintaining current levels, the total nuclear energy supply will last ~30000 years.
Upon replacing all other energy sources, nuclear power has the potential to power the world for ~1000 years.
Waste management is progressing rapidly, with several methods providing safe long-term solutions. Subduction zone disposal would provide waste disposal in the absolute sense.
Nuclear fission has the potential to act as a  'stop-gap' between 'Peak Oil' and fusion.
A possible timeline for the next 100 years is illustrated below;.
