The oximeter is used by passing light of two different wavelengths through the fingertip. This is received and input into a computerized system to represent the oxygen saturation and pulse of the patient. Oximetry is an important device to monitor patients within a medical environment.
From investigation, we have proved that the oximeter picks up on variations in pulse due to exercise, markedly an increase in heart rate. It is vital to remember that the oximeter probe is affected by movements, and by circulation issues such as vasoconstriction. People with poor circulation to the extremities may show up differently on the computer screen.
However, the oximeters are heavily used in surgery, to ensure that a patient under general anaesthetic is receiving enough oxygen, and not going into hypoxia. The oximeter can also be used in conjunction to an ECG machine, that measures heart signals directly.
Oximetry is a non-invasive method of monitoring the saturation of oxygen in the blood, which is important in medicine to notice the development of hypoxia. It is also used during anaesthesia to ensure that sufficient oxygen is getting into the bloodstream. The oximeter is a probe, which is linked to a computer, and is attached either to the patient 's finger or ear lobe. In this experiment, a finger oximeter will be used to produce a graphical display of heart rate. This report will examine the differences in pulse rate as recorded by the oximeter, when the patient is submitted to rest or exercise, whilst becoming familiarized with the calculations and mechanism of the probe. There will also be a brief look at what factors affect the accuracy of the recording.
The oximeter works by the detection of light through the fingertip or earlobe, which changes with the pulsatile flow of blood through the body. Two wavelengths of light are omitted and received by the device 's IR diodes: 650nm and 805nm, which is partially absorbed by the Haemoglobin in the red blood cells by varying amounts, depending on levels of oxygen saturation. Some factors affect the reception of light, including vasoconstriction and movement.
The oximeter to be used for this report is the IPOD Oximeter, which has integrated electronics combined within the clip, so that the only connection to be made is a serial link direct to the receptive computer. This means that the results will appear in a spreadsheet for analysis.
The Oximeter can be used in the diagnosis and monitoring of many disorders involving oxygen absorption. The most common use is during general anaesthesia, to ensure that sufficient oxygen is being ventilated. After surgery, it is also used to sense hypoxia.
Another frequent use is in the treatment of Obstructive Sleep Apnea Syndrome, which occurs in a small proportion of the population. This is where, during sleep, the muscles of the diaphragm can stop working, and so there is a risk of death due to lack of oxygen circulating to the brain.
Hypoperfusion, or shock, can be prevented if there is sufficient monitoring of the blood.
The Oximeter is occasionally used in the determination of carbon monoxide poisoning, although it must be noted, that only levels of oxygen can be detected due to the form of haemoglobin that is only formed with oxygen. For example, carboxyhaemoglobin, which is the fusion of haemoglobin with carbon dioxide, cannot be sensed with the oximeter.
The sensor that will be used is the IPOD Oximeter finger clip. Widely found in hospitals as a basic piece of monitoring equipment, it proves to be very useful in the diagnosis and monitoring of a number of maladies.
The IPOD Oximeter module consists of a peripheral probe, with a microprocessor unit. In this case, the peripheral probe contains two IR sensors, and the trace is displayed on a computer screen. The oximeter unit is attached to the computer via a serial link, plugged into the serial port COM1, and is connected to a 9V battery link.
The patient should be sat down, and the oximeter is clipped over the index, middle or ring finger. The measurements will be more accurate if the oximeter is kept still, and the finger is clean. Nail Varnish, for example, will interfere with the light that is passed through the fingertip.
Ultimately, it will be better to analyse results that were produced as a set for each patient. The aimed results therefore are for the patient at rest, the patient after exercise, and after having cooled the fingertip by running under cold water. This will show the differences between the control heart rate, and the heart rate at a higher speed and pressure, and will demonstrate how the recording is affected by vasoconstriction of the capillaries. It will be aimed that at least three patients are selected, to allow for individual differences, and for possible inaccuracies or mistakes that are incurred.
Three sets of tests were performed by three patients of similar physical description: Male, age 18-20. This is to allow for some level of control over differences in results. All three are non-smokers, and take part in exercise on a regular basis.
Due to the irregular format of the document that the results came in, it is very difficult to read the pulse rates straight off. Therefore, there is significant working that must be done in order to come up with the correct heart rates for each set of data.
The way in which this calculation was performed, goes that the time for each recording was taken down, and the set of figures put into a graph. This graph has many peaks, although the axis are insignificant, as seen in Graphs 1 - 6 on the following page. From our knowledge, we know the time of the sample, so if this time is taken and divided by 60 (seconds in a minute), then multiplied by the number of peaks on the graph, the heart rates come out as in Table. 1.
Graph 6. Tom after ExerciseGraph 5. Tom at Rest.
The differences between the three sets of results are quite high considering the three patients are superficially similar.
Rich 's heart rate is the lowest on both accounts. Whereas, Sam 's heart rate seems unhealthily high for a person at rest. This could be due to a number of reasons, including exercise prior to the experiment. Tom 's heart rates are somewhat in the middle; this indicates that he is a sportsman who participates in stamina sports, where the working heart rate must be kept in the middle range to maintain aerobic respiration.
Before the results were taken, the heart rates of the three patients were taken. Rich, whose apparent heart rate is 72bpm actually has a heart rate of 58. Sam 's actual heart rate is 86, and Tom 's is 65. This demonstrates that the oximeter has an inaccurate process for analysis. This is probably due to the spreadsheet format that it was converted into. It must also be taken into account that this device is not primarily used for measuring heart rate, but oxygen saturation.
The sample candidates were not regulated enough to maintain control. Exercise prior to the experiment may have been carried out, and the exercise during was not regulated.
It seems that this could be made into a larger and more thorough investigation if multiple candidates were used, and better control was maintained.
Other tests were briefly carried out, including the introduction of vasoconstriction to the fingertips due to cold water, and movement artifacts of the probe. On both of these, the results were severely hindered, and inaccurate. Which goes to show that the oximeter cannot be used in all medical situations, because the patient frequently has poor circulation or movement due to shivering or shaking.
Of course, the oximeter is not normally solely responsible for the monitoring of a patient. Often, it is combined with an ECG machine to directly measure heart signal electronically, as well as typical response testing to ensure that the patient is constantly under observation.
The oximeter is used by passing light of two different wavelengths through the fingertip. This is received and input into a computerized system to represent the oxygen saturation and pulse of the patient. Oximetry is an important device to monitor patients within a medical environment.
From investigation, we have proved that the oximeter picks up on variations in pulse due to exercise, markedly an increase in heart rate. It is vital to remember that the oximeter probe is affected by movements, and by circulation issues such as vasoconstriction. People with poor circulation to the extremities may show up differently on the computer screen.
However, the oximeters are heavily used in surgery, to ensure that a patient under general anaesthetic is receiving enough oxygen, and not going into hypoxia. The oximeter can also be used in conjunction to an ECG machine, that measures heart signals directly.
It has been suggested that the pulse oximeter will be developed in the future to rely on light reflectance instead of transmittance. This would mean that the light would not need to pass completely through a body part, and so it would not be restricted to use on the fingertip or earlobe. This could help in measurement of oxygen saturation across the body, so it could be determined if there are blood flow restrictions elsewhere. This would also lead to the development of an oximeter sensor to use within the uterus to monitor unborn baby 's oxygen levels, which would be highly useful in the future.
