Simple Life Ltd, founded in 2005 By requires   75,000 for the development and initial manufacturing of a tool to aid in the turning of everyday object in the household for sufferers of arthritis, carpel tunnel syndrome and claw hand. This initial investment will be in return for a 20% stake in the company.
The Arthritis Research Campaign state that 4.4 million people in the UK have X-ray evidence of moderate to severe arthritis in their hands [1]. This can be seen as Simple Life 's potential market.
A niche product has been designed that is better quality and more aesthetically pleasing than its rivals. Furthermore, unlike the products currently available, the Simple Life tool is universal.
By retailing not only through the internet, but through mail order and high street outlets we aim to quickly gain a firm place in the market.
Current assets stand at   57,000 gathered from family and personal savings.
In three years we aim to be manufacturing 26000 products a year, and have a closing profit of over   89,000.
In ten years, if the current trends continue and Simple life gains just 10% of the market from its main competitor Homecraft Roylan, you will have a five-fold return on your investment . "Aiding the community through technology".
CEO Simple Life.
A device to aid in three different household operations that prove particularly difficult for sufferers of common hand ailments such as arthritis, carpel tunnel syndrome and claw hand. The three different operations are covered by three separate tools. These are interchangeable about a central handle that is ergonomically designed for comfort and ease of use. This handle can be seen below.
The three tools are as follows:
Jar opener - This allows varying sizes of lids to be removed with ease.
Key turner - Provides more leverage for a standard door/window key.
Contour turner - this tool aids in turning of knobs and dials of various sizes.
This is the most important aspect in our business. We view quality as an order winning feature in this market, as current manufacturers have failed to implement this level of high quality. As a commitment to our customers and a demonstration of confidence in our product, we want to assure long term functionality and hence will offer a 3 year guarantee on all of our products. This will make our brand image that of a producer of high quality goods.
Again we feel that this is where our competitors fall down, allowing an exploitable gap in the market. Competitor 's products are sold in a clear plastic wrapper with a named sticky label attached. We are packaging with professionalism in mind; with visually attractive covering and clear description of the product.
Currently the majority of sales are through third party companies online. We do not believe that this is the optimum retail method for the Simple Life product. The majority of our target market is the age group 65+. Considering this fact, and the reviewing the chart below for 'Access to internet'. You can see that retailing through the internet may not be the best method, as only 4% of the UK internet usage is attributed to our majority target age group. This data is reflected in a report titled ' Home Shopping - UK- March 2005' from the Mintel economic database. It can be seen that 7% of over 65 's have purchased goods from the internet in the past 12 months [3]. From the same report it is shown that 28% of the same age group have purchased from a mail order catalogue. Based on this data we believe that mail order catalogues will be a more suitable method of retail than the internet, which is used by our competitors, Homecraft Roylan.
Suffering from arthritis does not impede the ability to stroll down the high street. We believe that despite the high possible sales through mail order catalogues, Customers always prefer purchasing a physical product. With our superior quality and eye catching design, it would be unwise to turn a blind eye to the possible sales that could be achieved through this method of retail. Therefore we are planning to sell through mail order and direct retailing channels.
Our product has spurred from the rival products (See Appendices a). These have a combined average cost of   20.27. As we are selling a focus differentiated product we believe that we can sell at a premium price. People will pay more for a universal device as it prevents clutter in the household. Also due to the product 's aesthetics it will stand out in the marketplace. Hence a recommended retail price of   25.00 is suitable. As our competition has a strong hold on the market, we will offer a high profit of margin for the retailers. By setting the wholesale price to   12 we offer a profit to the retailer of   13. At a cost of   2.80 to manufacture each product we achieve a gross profit of   9.20 per product and gross profit margin of over 76%. By doing this we can ensure that retailers will find it attractive to sell the Simple Life product over the more established competitor who is offering less return on sales.
For high street sales, we believe that a demonstration video would dramatically increase sales and set our product apart from our competitors. From this, potential customers will clearly see the benefits of having this multipurpose tool and so the product will sell itself. Expanding to trade shows such as the "Nursing & Elderly Care" whilst providing samples and additional information, can prove very successful in finding distributors for our products; this method can also reduce our overall costs if distributors agree upon sharing marketing and promotional costs. 4.4 million people in the UK have X-ray evidence of moderate to severe arthritis in their hands [1]. Coupled together with the growing number of sufferers of carpel tunnel syndrome and claw hand, this large customer base is expanding year on year.
As can be seen from the diagram on page 6, the majority of the people with arthritic conditions are above the age of 55 (78%), with nearly half the market lying over the age of 65 [1]. The UK population is ageing every year, and it is forecast that the over 65s will account for 23.9% of the UK population by 2031. Hand in hand with this age increase, will be the rise of age related complaints such as arthritis. Hence our market will grow as the company moves towards the future.
The industry consists of only one major manufacturer; Homecraft Roylan. Therefore the market place is monopolistic; however the barriers to entry are easy to overcome with our unique selling points stated in the product section.
Over the past three years, Homecraft Roylan have enjoyed high annual turnover. The latest figures show a global turnover of   25.6 million and a UK turnover of   18.6 million, with a profit margin of 18.4% [5]. This shows a healthy market in this industry which we could exploit through our new and exciting product. This healthy market opportunity is echoed through the number of potential customers.
Mr is married with two children. He obtained a First in MEng in Civil Engineering with Business Management (Hons) at the University of from 1982-1986. In the last 3 years of University he set up a company to tutor local GCSE students in Maths. This was a lucrative decision and the business, 'It All Adds Up!' flourished: when he left there were over 50 tutors and 300 tutees.
After graduation he joined the Young Talents Development Scheme at Balfour Beatty. He worked as a graduate engineer on projects of increasing value and achieved Chartership with the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1987.
In 1989 he left Balfour Beatty to get some International experience in Nigeria, where he worked on the Federal Ministries Complex (valued at     18,000 million) with Julius Berger, Nigeria. then went on to work as a Design Manager for Carillion Caribbean in Jamaica and Trinidad. He was in charge of design for the J$700 million renovation of the UWI Jamaica Campus.
On his return to the UK in 1995 he progressed to the role of Design Manager for the London region within Skanksa Civils UK. Here, he managed a team of 8 and increased productivity by 15%. It was during this time that he commenced his Global Executive MBA at TRIUM (a consortium consisting of London School of Economics, New York University Stern School of Business and Hautes Etudes Commerciales School of Management, Paris) for which he received a Distinction.
In 2000 he was appointed Technical Director of Skanska Civils UK where he secured a deal with Skanska AB (the Global parent company of Skanska, which operates in Sweden) whereby the Procurement department of Global Skanska companies act as one entity to secure economies of scale and deliver greater purchasing power.
In 2005 Mr envisaged a product that could greatly simplify the life of a member of his family suffering from arthritis. He identified a flaw in existing products and saw a niche sector which could be exploited.
Dr achieved a First in MEng in Manufacturing and Mechanical Engineering (Hons) at the University of from 1991-1995. He then went on to work as a Graduate Engineer at Western Thomson Plastics. He gained experience in Finite Element Analysis, plastic moulding and the design process.
In 1998 he became a Research Engineer at Flextronics Medical division where he worked on the collaborative project with Acorn developing a revolutionary Superglide Stairlift. He was then sponsored to undertake a Research Doctorate (EngD) in 'Re-Engineering the New Product Introduction Process' with the Manufacturing Group at the University of . During this time was promoted to become Research Manager of the Acorn-Flextronics Medical collaboration.
In 2005 he was approached by Mr and became the Technical Director of Simple Life met at the University of whilst Dr was undertaking his MEng in Manufacturing and Mechanical Engineering. was his professional mentor from 1993 until he left in 1995. The two formed a close bond: found to be an extremely intelligent student that thought outside of the box, with a penchant for self improvement. found to be an excellent mentor that encouraged him to achieve in an effective manner. They stayed in contact, when graduated, sent 6 students to do placements in  's team from 2001-2005. Their friendship grew whilst was studying for his Research Doctorate. was the natural choice for Technical Director of Simple Life. They anticipate hiring a Marketing Executive in Year 4.
The cost of physical spaces depends very much upon the location. A warehouse situated in Newport with security and 1000 sq. ft of floor space can cost as much as   12,000 to rent per annum, and much more if rented from a more expensive location such as the midlands. In the first two years there will be no need for external storage, as the products are relatively small. This low volume of products can easily be stored in the converted garage from which Simple Life operates. However from year three, with an estimated output of 24,700 units sold more space will be required. It will then be a necessity to rent a 100 sq meter warehouse, which will cost from   2,400 per year.
One of the other main factors affecting location is the ease of distribution, for example; by renting space next to main transport routes, delivery to the retailers is a lot easier. By situating our storage close to a postal depot, the time to send off items to Simple Life customers can be dramatically reduced.
Assets such as machinery and factory space will be initially leased but molds will be bought, this is included in the tooling costs. The chosen manufacturing process will be injection molding; this method promises speed and good finishing with little waste of material.
Production units will be around 450 units in the first year, rising to 24700 units in the third year. Depending on success, more capital may be invested in fixed assets and skilled labour. With increased production, quality control becomes an important factor. As production will be a continuous process, random units will be taken out at set intervals to check for faults. This high level of quality control will ensure that the brand image of Simple Life is upheld. deemed being a sole trader an unsuitable option for Simple Life. As a Father and Husband, he regarded the level of risk encompassed with unlimited liability, unsuitable due to the potential of personal bankruptcy through the business. He also felt that had played too great a role in the development of the product to be denied shares and Directorship within the company.
As with sole trading, did wish to risk being in a partnership due to the risks of personal bankruptcy to both himself and . Since the assets of one partner may be seized to cover the debt of the business, instead he preferred an option where the company is a separate legal entity from the owners.
Private Limited Companies (Ltds) are a separate legal entity from it 's owners; the shareholders. Financial investment in the company leads to share ownership. Ltds have limited liability with regards to financial problems. This means shareholders only stand to lose what they have invested in the company. chose this option because it offered the optimum balance between limited liability and significant control. It also gave a high level of responsibility to .
Public Limited Companies (Plcs) are the same as Ltds but the shares are available for public purchase on the Stock Exchange. As Simple Life is a small company, this would be impractical. also did not want the possibility of losing control of his personal project to shareholders. Furthermore publicly declaring the finances of Simple Life was not desirable. established Simple Life as a Private Limited Company in 2005. Currently, he owns 60% of the shares and owns 40%. They are offering the Venture Capitalist 20% for   75,000. Of the remaining shares 50% will belong to and will have 30%) plans to sell the business on in 10 years time; even with a 10% share of the total current market, this would relate to a turnover of   2 million per annum, since the market for disability aids at this present date is worth   18.6 million. The revenue will be returned to each shareholder in the ratio 20:30:50 to the Venture Capitalist, and respectively. This performance would relate to over five fold return on your initial investment.
At present, Simple Life has   57,000 in savings and family donations. This is used to cover day to day expenditure. It is estimated that a further   75,000 investment is required to develop the product. This will bring assets in the bank to a total of   132,000. Simple Life anticipates producing 450 units in the first year, with sales reaching 400 units. Simple life can manufacture these units at   2.80 each. By selling them at a wholesale price of   12, revenue of   4800 will be generated. Overhead costs (incorporating factors such as salary, training, research and development, marketing and insurance) will be approximately   56,200. Therefore the predicted net loss/deficit in the first year would be   52,520. In a worst case scenario, where only 200 units are sold the net loss would be   58160.
In the second year Simple Life forecasts sales of 7,000 units. This would give   84,000 revenue and a gross profit of   4,520. It is anticipated that sales will peak in winter when the cold exacerbates mobility disabilities. The second fiscal year will prove extremely challenging as Simple Life has set a target of achieving profit by this year. Prudence must be exercised to achieve this, as it is anticipated that Simple Life will have   2,200 debt:   500 of which is in receivable accounts. It is not guaranteed that customers will pay the debt owed to Simple Life. The receivable accounts figure will increase to   1,500 at the end of the third year. Stringent credit checks will be used to counter this and use of a collection agency will minimize the risk from bad debtors.
At the end of the second year Simple Life will have approximately 1,050 units in storage. Sales are expected to rise to 24,700 units in year three: this will increase variable costs and overheads as the rate of manufacture will increase to 26,000 units a year. With increased investment in research and development, this will bring overheads up to   138,082. However, with forecast sales Simple Life will generate a profit of   89,157.
Simple life prides itself on quality innovation, with the hope of "aiding people through technology." Our mentality and focussed ingenuity will make this business a success. A modest outlook has been adopted for the creation of our three year projections. From the great selling points that our product has above the leading competitors, sales could easily surpass our initial predictions. We see a world in which arthritis, claw hand, carpel tunnel syndrome and other hand affecting ailments will no longer inhibit the day to day living of its sufferers. The Simple Life tool will provide this solution.
