On the 1 st of July 2007, a decade will have passed since Hong Kong was returned to China. A good evaluation of its implication is not possible without answering the question, "To what extent do the Hong Kong people feel that they belong to China?" Among the various social institutions, education is assigned the prominent role of transmitting the national identity to our next generation. Have the schools been doing the job successfully? This research aims to answer this question by looking into local secondary schools, to evaluate the changes of the schools' perceptions and practices over nationalistic education in the past 10 years, and the effectiveness of the various strategies in the implementation of nationalistic education.
The Hong Kong government realized the importance of nationalistic education before the handover took place. In 1996, the Education Department published a new guideline which introduced nationalistic education into the new curriculum; in 2002, the Education Commission gave explicit prominence to the education of national identity, by putting it as one of the five priority values to be conveyed through citizenship education. However, the policies have not been as promising as initially envisaged. Students are continuously under criticism about being apathetic towards their motherland; even the local educators remain skeptical towards the notion of nationalistic education, worrying that it will lead to "blind patriotism" and undermine the critical thinking of students.
Education Department was combined with the Education and Manpower Bureau in 2003 due to the departmental restructuring.
The above "tension" between the policy makers and the schools illustrates the complexity in the implementation of nationalistic education. The construction of national identity is not a one-way process but a negotiable one between the policy makers and the schools. A true understanding of the process cannot be achieved without going into the school to understand its mechanism. In the light of this argument, the research will provide an in-depth exploration of the schools, detailing the intricate mechanisms of the teaching of nationalism. The research will cover both the operational level of the schools and the personal level of the teachers. The research problems can in turn translate into 4 research questions.
What are the schools' general understandings about nationalistic education? How has it been changed over the past 10 years?.
How is the nationalistic education implemented inside the schools?.
How do the teachers perceive their role in disseminating nationalistic education?.
Are there differences in understanding of nationalistic education between schools with different backgrounds, i.e. the Christian schools, the Government schools and the "Pro-China" schools?.
Schools with other religions exist in Hong Kong but Christianity is the majority (239 out of 501 secondary schools in total), so I choose to focus on Christian schools.
There are 6 so called "Pro-Chinese" secondary schools in Hong Kong. The schools were marginalized before 1997 and they returned to the mainstream after the handover. (Morris, Kan & Morris 2000).
The research aims to study secondary schools instead of primary schools because it is believed that authority inception takes place from birth to the age of 6 to 10 (Wilson 1970). Students in the secondary level are more likely to question authority. Since the research would like to examine the "contested" nature of nationalistic education, secondary schools are preferred. "Belonging to a country" is natural and is taken for granted for most of the people in the world; but people in Hong Kong are an exception. Before the handover, the colonial government refrained from mobilizing any nationalistic sentiments in order to ensure stability in the territory; as a result, the education curriculum was more or less "depoliticalized" (Fairbrother 2003, Fairbrother 2005, Lam 2005, Ma 2004). However, after the handover, the Special Administrative Region government assigned a new mission to the schools by advocating that the promotion of national identity should be incorporated into the local civic education curriculum.
The apolitical youth produced by the colonial education is undesirable; but the new "political mission" assigned to the educators after the handover is no less problematic. The situation has been thoroughly discussed by substantial researches, both before and after 1997. In general, the civic education was criticized as "apolitical" both before and after the handover; the democratic value was neglected (Tse 1997) and students were continuously taught to be "economic animals" (Lam 2005). More importantly, the related post-colonial researches revealed the skeptical (or even repulsive) attitude of local politicians and educators towards the new "political role" of the schools. Arguments were raised whether "loving China" equals "loving the communist party" (Fairbrother 2005), and whether the image of China should remain homogenous and positive in the nationalistic education (Morris, Kan & Morris 2000). A survey which was conducted after the handover showed that the majority of local secondary schools rejected the notion of "totalitarian nationalism", which demanded uncritical devotion to the state and the leadership of the ruling party (Leung & Print 2002). The schools expressed worries about turning the nationalistic education into an irrational patriotic education.
Hong Kong people 's repulsive attitude towards the political situation in China can be explained in a number of historical and social factors; however its discussion would be beyond the scope of the present research. For reference please refer to Eric Ma on "Top-down Patriotism and Bottom-up Nationalization in Hong Kong" (2004); and Anthony Fung on "Postcolonial Hong Kong Identity: Hybridising the Local and the National"(2004).
People are generally bound to their homelands either by political or cultural will (Barnard 1988, Wiborg 2000). If we take them as the two "approaches" in constructing the national identity among people, the above research findings have already proven that the former (political) is not feasible in Hong Kong. On the other hand, the construction of national identity through cultural recognition is by no means easy. The Chinese literature and Chinese history curriculum in the local secondary schools have been under severe attack as being rigid and irrelevant to youngsters nowadays, the number of schools that provide these two subjects is continuously dropping (Hong Kong Economic Times 2005). How can we cultivate the sense of belonging from the culture which students find detached and boring?.
My discussion seems to imply a dead-end to the path of nationalistic education. However my personal experience told me quite the opposite; and it gives new significance to the present research. When I was a reporter in the education section of Mingpao, I was invited to join the schools to visit China. To my surprise, it was arranged for students to visit at least one manufacturing plant or giant enterprise everyday during the visit. The trip itself was more like a business tour which explored the investment opportunities in the mainland, rather than a tour that served an educational purpose. Based on the above peculiar but not uncommon observation, the present research would like to investigate on the possible "third way" in nationalistic education - the way which is not based on political or cultural attachment, but purely based on market economy.
Mingpao is a Chinese newspaper in Hong Kong, which runs a daily education page.
The above presumption is supported by Eric Ma. In his ethnographic research (2004), he argued that a "bottom-up" nationalization process has been taking place effectively on a day-to-day basis, with the increasing economic exchanges between Hong Kong and China. Is his argument still effective when applied to education? This is the new realm that the present research is going to explore.
The past researches tended to base their investigations on the guidelines provided by the Education Department (Fairbrother 2003, Fairbrother 2005, Lam 2005, Morris, Kan & Morris 2000), or the textbooks and curriculum available in the schools (Wilson 1970). These approaches kept the studies on the institutional level. However, school by itself should be an organic and open institution where teachers have the autonomy to influence the process and to make a difference (Apple 2002, Young 1971). Given that the Education Department proposed that nationalistic education would be developed as a school based programme (Leung & Print 2002), teachers are the key players in the development of nationalistic education. It justifies a research approach which is different from most of the previous researches - instead of an institutional level of analysis, the present research will investigate schools by observing and talking to teachers, in order to capture the delicate mechanism of the implementation of nationalistic education, as perceived by the teachers, and inside the schools.
The aim of the present study is to investigate the perception and implementation of nationalistic education since 1997 among Hong Kong secondary schools, in the hope of suggesting the direction of nationalistic education in the future. The objectives of the research are:
To present the changes of nationalistic education in schools since 1997.
To locate the effective means of cultivating the sense of national belonging among students.
To understand teachers' experiences in carrying out the task of nationalistic education.
To evaluate factors that influence the implementation of nationalistic education in schools.
A combined application of quantitative and qualitative methodology will be adopted in the research. The advantages of a multi-strategy research design in this case are as follows,.
To answer the research question on different levels (Bryman 2004) -- Quantitative methodology will be used to understand the overall picture of implementation of nationalistic education in Hong Kong (the macro level); while qualitative methodology allows an in-depth account on the individual school 's mechanism (the micro level).
A holistic approach to the research problem (Brannen 2005) - The qualitative data can be contextualized by the quantitative data and it allows the materials to be discussed in a larger social framework.
Both of the cross-sectional and the case study designs will be employed in the study (Bryman 2004). The overall design incorporates a variety of methods for data collection to deal with different research questions, which will be explained in a table on the next page. Please note that the relationship between the methodologies and research questions is not mutually exclusive; instead, there are many overlaps.
Questionnaires will be delivered to all of the secondary schools in Hong Kong (501 in total); the schools' contact details can be sought from the "Secondary School Profiles" which is available online. A fax number and a prepaid envelop will be attached in the mail to encourage a higher response rate. The questionnaire will contain both open-ended and close-ended questions regarding,.
School 's background: Religious background, sponsoring body, funding mode, commencement year.
School 's perception of nationalistic education: What is your understanding of nationalistic education?.
School 's practice of nationalistic education: Is national flag rising and national anthem singing practiced in the school? What nationalistic education related learning experiences are available this academic year? 6 secondary schools from different backgrounds will be chosen for case studies (2 Christian schools, 2 Government schools and 2 "Pro-China" schools). A maximum variation sampling (Punch 2000) strategy will be adopted to ensure the inclusion of schools with characteristics that seem important in the context of study (Locke, Spirduso & Silverman 1993). My previous work experience in the education news helps to facilitate the process of school selection and negotiation with the "gatekeepers", who are generally, the school principals. After entry is gained, data will be collected in 2 ways,.
Participant observation. This will take place around the national day of China (1 st of October). My previous visits to schools show that they usually organize activities a week before or after the national day; this will guarantee at least 1 or 2 visits to each school during this period, despite the possible time clash of these activities.
Semi-structured interviews. From each school, the principal and 2 teachers who are responsible for nationalistic education will be invited for an in-depth interview. Questions for the principals mainly focus on the school management level. For example, the history of nationalistic education in the school; the school 's overall year plan on the matter and how it is related to the school 's understandings about nationalistic education; and the principal 's general evaluation on the implementation of nationalistic education in Hong Kong.
Questions for the teachers will be related to their personal teaching experiences. They include the difficult and successful moments that teachers come across when implementing nationalistic education; their personal affiliation with China and their thoughts about China-Hong Kong politics; how do these personal values affect their teaching.
For the survey data, a coding sheet will be prepared for use with the questionnaire. Frequency counts will be produced with variables, such as the number of schools that practice national ceremonies; and the number of schools that includes nationalistic education into the regular curriculum. Two frameworks will be employed to guide the analysis of the schools' perceptions and actual practices of nationalistic education. The schools' perceptions of nationalistic education will be categorized into the stages of "cognition, emotion and action" ; while the schools' implementation of nationalistic education will be classified into the "political, cultural and economical" approaches.
This concept is put forward by the Education and Manpower Bureau. In general, "cognition" refers to understanding your country; "emotion" refers to loving your country; and "action" refers to contributing to your country.
Lastly, cross-tabulation will be employed to examine the correlations between the backgrounds of the schools against the above variables. The process will be aided by SPSS computer software if necessary.
The technical skill of managing SPSS is not yet acquired when drafting this research proposal.
The qualitative data analysis will draw from grounded theories such as Strauss and Cobin (1990). After the tape-recorded interviews are transcripted, the transcripts and notes taken during participant observation will be coded, in the hope of yielding general concepts on the changes of schools' attitudes towards nationalistic education, the patterns of schools in perceiving and practicing nationalistic education, and the correlations between teachers' personal values and their experiences of nationalistic education. Again, the frameworks of the "cognition, emotion and action stages" and the "political, cultural and economical approaches" will be adopted to examine teachers' perceptions and implementation on nationalistic education respectively. Computer software Nvivo will be used if necessary.
The same as footnote 8.
Despite the fact that freedom of speech is highly respected in Hong Kong, discussion about the politics of identity can still be sensitive, especially when the discussion is taking place inside schools, where teachers are required to follow stricter codes of ethics in the context of their profession (Wilson 1970). The research has already taken into account the Statement of Ethical Practice provided by the British Sociology Association. The following measures will be adopted to protect the subjects,.
An informed consent will be obtained from the interviewees. The purpose of the research will be stated and the interviewees will also be reminded about their right to withdraw from the interview at any moment.
In-depth interviewees will be conducted individually.
All data is guaranteed to be treated in a way that protects the confidentiality and anonymity of the interviewees.
The Hong Kong government has been advocating nationalistic education and investing resources to promote it since 1997. By understanding the teachers' experiences in nationalistic education and recognizing the "good practices" from the schools, it provides valuable information to policy makers in formulating the policy and relocating the funding in future.
By recognizing the schools' "good practices" in nationalistic education, it helps to facilitate professional dialogue among educators, which in turn improve the quality of education as a whole.
Under the challenge of globalization, there is a remarkable increase of interest in citizenship education (Green 2006). The experience of Hong Kong will provide implications and insights for related studies throughout the world.
Scholars and researchers: The full report will be presented as conference papers and submitted to related journals such as "Asia-Pacific Education Review".
Policy makers: The finished report will be presented on the website of the Quality Education Fund; copies will be sent to the Education and Manpower Bureau and the Education Commission for future references.
Schools and teachers: Workshops about the research findings can be given to school councils upon request.
General public: The researcher will organize a press conference to announce the findings of the survey.
The research aims to be completed in one year, below is the anticipated timetable.
Month 1: Literature review, preparation of research materials (questionnaires, coding sheets, written consent forms).
Month 2: Commencement of survey; data input; school cases confirmation.
Month 3-9: Commencement of participant observation and in-depth interviews; data analysis.
Month 10-12: Writing up.
