The alleviation of human misery through medical science has an abstract element that transcends the mundane, thus does not lend itself easily to practical analysis particularly in conjunction with legal regulation. This abstract element is contained within moral constraints on the freedom of science and any regulations must balance these two competing interests through carefully constructed ethical guidelines to protect individuals and society and to facilitate research and testing. This essay seeks to ground the debate with an exposition of the controversies surrounding the use of human embryological stem cells in research to better elucidate these abstract concepts and considerations. The legal framework provides an illuminating insight into the UK 's attempt to balance competing interests between science and morality. As such the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990 will be considered along with further primary and secondary legislation and caselaw.
This is a somewhat arbitrary choice as stem cell research is by no means the only topical area that would ground these abstract concepts; IVF treatment more generally, and in particular processes like Pre-Genetic Implantation Diagnosis (PGD) which aid the creation of so-called saviour siblings or designer babies; new techniques in organ and tissue transplantation; the use of incapacitated adults in research or as donors; all of these and many more are firmly part of the wider debate.
It is asserted that the UK has one of the most liberal regulatory systems for these techniques. However the current regulations are by no means clear, cohesive or consistent, and any balance between competing ideologies could be questioned. As a global civilisation we hold answers to the immutable secrets of nature in such research, but the socio-legal ramifications of this could be further reaching than we allow.
Since the Enlightenment science and morality have wrestled for competing claims to legitimacy in the public arena. Morality has oft been seen as the domain of the Church, and thus theology plays a central role in this debate; reason and logic does not understand faith and belief, and divine truth will not accept empirical observation. In the middle stands philosophy. In the medical field this is most acutely apparent as the human body is the most notable site at which these opposing ideologies converge. To facilitate medical research within acceptable parameters of morality, ethical guidelines and regulations have matured which seek to balance theological and philosophical concerns with the philosophy underpinning science, that of rational and objective freedom in the pursuit of knowledge. Thus medical ethics plays a central role in informing policy in this area.
For further debate on this see Penner, James, David Schiff and Richard Nobles (eds.) (2002) Jurisprudence and Legal Theory: Commentary and Materials, LexisNexis Butterworths Tolley: London.
See Okasha, S., The Philosophy of Science: A Very Short Introduction, (2002) Oxford University Press: Oxford.
Most ethical theories are rooted in two key philosophical theories, utilitarianism and Kantianism, the most notable of which in bioethics are, respectively, consequentialism and deontology. Jeremy Bentham wrote extensively on the principle of utility as a model of social action and formulated an algorithm he called the felicific calculus as part of his project to make morals amenable to scientific treatment. The felicific calculus worked out the degree of happiness that a specific action is likely to cause, and so its degree of moral rightness. As consequentialism is rooted in utilitarianism it refers to those theories that place emphasis on the consequences of any action, as opposed to other normative criteria; the outcome of any action determines its morality.
As proposed by the analytic philosopher G.E.M. Anscombe in her essay Modern Moral Philosophy.
Deontology on the other hand focuses on the types of actions; some actions are implicitly good or bad regardless of the consequences. This reasoning was first seen in the work of Immanuel Kant who proposed the categorical imperative, an indisputable duty to promote human rationality and freedom based on a priori reasoning of the general nature of things. The fundamental difference between these positions is that whilst consequentialism conceives the right and the good to be synonymous, deontology distinguishes between them thus an action that is good may not be right. Rule consequentialism does not see these positions as mutually exclusive. Here actions must follow immutable rules but those rules are chosen based on the consequences, although the absolute nature of these rules is debated.
See Robert Nozick and Amartya Sen for opposing positions.
These fundamental ethical positions illuminate the debate on the regulation of new medical technologies as it is not only the policy that is informed by them but the regulations themselves. An apt area in which this application can be seen is the topical debate on the use of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) in medical research as it has been widely acknowledged that the investigations in this area have huge therapeutic potential for diseases such as Parkinson 's and Alzheimer 's. However, the interference with principles such as the sanctity of life and bodily integrity make this a very controversial area of study.
See for instance M. Raff, 'The Biology of the Adult Stem'; A. Bjorklund, 'Prospects for a Stem Cell Therapy for Parkinson 's Disease'; and E. Gluckman, 'New Sources of Blood Stem Cells: Therapeutic Implications' in Stem Cell Therapies for the Future, Conference organised by the European Commission, Brussels, 18-19 December 2001, cited in Plomer, A., Beyond the HFE Act 1990: The Regulation of Stem Cell Research in the UK, MLR 10:132-164 pp. 132.
Human embryonic stem cell research is currently a salient element in the advancement of medical technology to alleviate human misery. hESCs are pluripotent cells meaning they have the potential to develop into any cell type through differentiation, a process where less specialised cells develop into more specialised cells through expressing or repressing different subsets of genes within the individual cells. Embryo-derived stem cells are not alone with this potential; adult somatic stem cells such as those found in bone marrow may also be used but the properties of this type of cell become increasingly restrictive with tissue development, hence hESCs provide the best prospects for curative therapies.
De Sousa, P.A., G. Galea and M. Turner, The Road to Providing Human Embryonic Stem Cells for Therapeutic Use: The UK Experience, (2006) Reproduction 132: 681-189 pp.189.
However, the use of hESCs has reopened the debate on embryonic technologies since it necessarily involves the use and destruction of embryos. This is further complicated with the successful application of cell nuclear replacement (CNR), a type of cloning that replaces the nucleus of an egg with an adult cell. The cytoplasm within the egg reprogrammes the adult nucleus allowing it to behave as if it were in a one cell embryo. Therapeutic cloning uses CNR to procure embryos that at the blastocyst stage can derive stem cells from the inner cell mass. This is at about 4-5 days into development where an a cluster of cells called the inner cell mass forms the embryo which is suspended in fluid and surrounded by an outer cell layer which will form the placenta. These stem cells derived from the inner cell mass can then be induced to produce any cells from within the body, for example dopamine-producing neurons that are lacking in the brains of Parkinson 's disease sufferers. As the process does not require fertilisation, CNR has provided an effective source of embryos that does not rely on limited surplus quantities donated following successful IVF treatment.
Dolly the sheep was the first successfully cloned mammal using this technique.
In the UK the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990 (HFE Act) lays out the procedural safeguards for the use of human cells in research and therapy, thus it is the primary source of legal reference for geneticists. The legal bright line adopted by the Act draws upon a special status afforded to hESCs as suggested by the Warnock Report. Ethical boundaries were drawn regarding the stage of embryonic development to be reached before destruction. Thus the HFE Act asserts an embryo must be destroyed within 14 days of fertilisation or on appearance of the primitive streak, as after 14 days pluripotent cells develop along determinate lines and the formation of an individual organism is begun. This was considered a suitable compromise to differentiate between an organism that can be manipulated to provide curative treatments for millions of people, and an organism that could be considered to have begun life.
The Warnock Report preceded and informed the debate on the HFE Act. Report of the Committee of Inquiry into Fertilisation and Embryology, (Cm. 9314) (1984).
A further ethical boundary is the purpose of the research. The research must fall within one of five purposes outlined in schedule 2 section 3(1) of the HFE Act or the three additional purposes introduced in the Human Fertilisation and Embryology (Research Purposes) Regulations 2001. The theme running through all of them is to only use hESCs for sufficiently serious research to further the global knowledge of genetics in the direction of alleviating certain causes of human misery. Both of these boundaries suggest a consequentialist perspective was adopted as the sanctity of life, generally considered an absolute moral principle, is sought to be offset against the greater good. However, the philosophical ideologies are not in harmony it may be argued balance was struck through these restrictions as a political middle ground has been sought, and once introduced, was widely accepted amongst the public. What aided this process was the long and detailed consultation period before the HFE Act was introduced, something that lent legitimacy to the outcome of the regulations.
However, this public acceptance has since been tested as the Act has required reconsideration on the issue of CNR. The source of the embryo is another way in which boundaries for research may be drawn, and although the UK has thus far stood with international consensus that reproductive cloning should be prohibited, it stands alone within the Europe on permitting the creation of human embryos specifically for research purposes, including with cloning techniques. This is a somewhat more liberal approach to determining ethical boundaries than was afforded by the regulations on the stage of development and purposes of research, and the legislative procedure through which this passed was neither long nor detailed resulting in a strained interpretation of the Act. This has led to considerable unease about the ethical policy surrounding genetic research. (note 6 supra) p.3, pp.132: Article 11 of the Universal Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Right (adopted by the United Nations, 11 December 1998); Council of Europe 's Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine (signed 12 January 1998); Article 3 of the Charter on Fundamental Rights of the European Union (14 October 2000).
The Human Reproductive Cloning Act 2001 specifically prohibited reproductive cloning.
The HFE Act only prohibits the use of cloning when an embryonic nucleus is replaced with that of a cell from "any person, embryo or subsequent development of an embryo"; it does not prohibit the creation of an embryo by replacing the nucleus of an egg with an adult nucleus (CNR). This left a legal lacuna in the regulation of CNR which the Government, in a somewhat knee-jerk reaction, filled with ill-advised secondary legislation (HFE (RP) Regulations 2001). However legality of this was challenged in the Quintavalle case as it was contended CNR lay outside the scope of the HFE Act. It was contended the definition of 'embryo' in section 1 (1) (a) as ''a live human embryo where fertilisation is complete'' and the corresponding emphasis throughout section 1 on fertilisation, in conjunction with the specific prohibition on a certain type of cloning contained in section 3 (3) (d) meant to draw CNR under the ambit of the Act would be impossible as a purposive interpretation of the statute would be too strained. As such secondary legislation would be ineffective.
HFE Act 1990 section 3 (3) (d) (note 6 supra) p.3 for a more detailed exposition.
R (on the application of 'Quintavalle') v Secretary of State for Health [2003] UKHL 13.
However, despite an exemplary judgment by Crane J in the High Court, the Court of Appeal (later upheld by the House of Lords) ruled in favour of the Government, citing Lord Wilberforce 's dictum that interpretation may extend to facts which fall within the same genus as those to which policy was formulated. Much debate has raged as to the uncertainty this has created within the law. Beyond the doubt of the courts' freedom to use the purposive approach, concerns have been raised regarding the comparison of the creation of embryos through fertilisation or through CNR. In order to reconcile the regulations these two types of embryos were considered to be within the same 'genus of facts' as per Lord Bingham (and thus covered by the definition of 'embryo' in s 1 (1) (a)). It has been questioned what is substantially different between these processes for the creation of embryos, and the process prohibited in s 3 (3) (d). Further to this, s 3 (3) (d) distinguishes between the creation and use of embryos through cloning and fertilisation which shows Parliament 's intention not to treat all similar organisms alike. The different treatment of the provisions in the Act, one interpreted literally and the other very widely has also created puzzlement. In addition to these inconsistencies, the permitted purposes for the use of stem cells outlined in the HFE (RP) Regulations have been criticised by the House of Lords Select Committee on stem cell research for being conceptually vague.
Royal College of Nursing of the United Kingdom v Department of Health and Social Security [1981] A.C. 800 at 822.
For a more detailed discussion of the inconsistencies within the Act see Morgan, D and M. Ford, Cell Phoney: Human Cloning after Quintavalle, (2004) J Med Ethics 30: 524 - 526.
Brownsword R. Stem cells, Superman and the Report of the Select Committee. (2002) 65 Modern Law Review 568.
These inconsistencies demonstrate a complete breakdown in the coherence of the regulatory framework of embryonic techniques, and it is no wonder the Government have spent the previous two years in consultation for the white paper presented on 10 th January 2007 outlining proposed changes to the law. Whilst it is obvious a consequentialist approach has been taken throughout the HFE Act and subsequent primary and secondary legislation, there is no balance to the motivations behind it. The HFE Act was initially successful in both protecting the integrity of science and protecting society from the excesses of science through the boundaries elucidated above regarding the purpose of the research and the source of the embryo. With the conflicting secondary legislation that followed these boundaries were shifted; purposes of research were lost in vague terminology; the source of an embryo was widened to include a particular type of cloning with no substantial difference to other types of cloning prohibited in the parent act. This resonates with there being no clear policy on genetics, and legislation becoming increasingly reactive rather than proactive through ad hoc application. This can also be seen through comparative studies of other jurisdictions. Halliday argues that the globalised nature of genetics demands an international regulatory response. However, not even national regulatory frameworks are coherent, as evidenced in the UK, and most work on the same ad hoc basis. It is perhaps alarming that the most consistent feature noted by Halliday is that the law 's role in this area seems to introduce control measures only after scientific excess.
Brownsword, R., Regulating Human Genetics: New Dilemmas for a New Millennium, (2004) Medical Law Review 12:14-32.
See generally Isasi1, R.M. and B.M. Knoppers, Beyond the Permissibility of Embryonic and Stem Cell Research: Substantive Requirements and Procedural Safeguards, (2006) Human Reproduction 21:10: 2474 - 2481; Pickering, G. and J. Wilkinson, Stemming the flow (March 30 2006) Legal Week Global.
Halliday, S., A Comparative Approach to the Regulation of Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research, (2004) Medical Law Review 12: 40 - 69.
This breakdown in consistency and coherence within the legal framework is symptomatic of what has been termed the 'genetic exceptionalism'. New technologies are being developed at a rate with which the law cannot compete. The balance sought through informed debate, as was seen in the Warnock Report and the subsequent legislation, cannot be maintained and neither can the law 's proactive regulatory hold on genetics, thus a new approach must be considered. The chaotic characteristic of genetic research through constant innovation is fundamentally de-stabilising and 'embodies a tendency to break down the foundational categories and boundaries underpinning and taken for granted within the law, for example... the meaning attributed to 'embryo'', whereas law, in ethos at least, is a stabilising societal institutional. As such genetics and the law are fundamentally at odds, and it has been suggested that genetics is exemplary of the law 's relationship with all science. As such it may be that the law has to adapt more than it ever has before to envisage a regulatory future with science generally, and medical science specifically.
Halliday, S. and D.L. Steinberg, The Regulated Gene: New Legal Dilemmas, (2004) Medical Law Review 12: 2 - 13 (note 21 supra) p.7 (note 23 supra) p.8 (note 21 supra) p.7.
In light of these arguments it must be questioned how a meaningful and internally cohesive system of regulation can be devised to reach the aim of balancing the interests of science and morality. As it stands, the development of new medical technologies to alleviate human misery are inhibited more by the lack of a consistent regulatory framework than they are by over-regularisation. Law has a role to play in facilitating scientific research as much as it does in limiting it. As elucidated by Samantha Halliday and Deborah Lynn Steinberg: (note 23 supra) p.8, pp. 10-11.
Without clarity and consistency it is difficult, if not impossible, to encourage informed debate on an area such as hESC research as there is no common ground from which to work. Halliday and Steinberg recognise the need for the view of  'scientists being objective and of non-scientists being irrational or merely ignorant' must be expelled. This cannot occur without a basic framework on which to build, although this should be based on law reacting to scientific innovation and not setting out the lawful ambit of inquiry. ibid. pp. 11.
Roger Brownsword suggests using the teleological approach would be appropriate to not only create such a framework but to underpin the social function of regulation itself. The 'regulatory connection', the balance between flexibility and certainty and generally and specifically applicable regulations, would be afforded through this approach. Halliday and Steinberg suggest a different approach. They would argue that the whole question of genetic exceptionalism needs unpacking, with particular regard to the tumultuous relationship of law and science, and how this illuminates the law 's limitations in other spheres. Perhaps the best approach for this post-modern condition would be a post-modernist inquiry. ibid.
