In an era of network or relationship marketing, maintaining effective communications with global customers is critically important for suppliers, agents and distributors to succeed in internationalization (Hamill, 1997). The internet provides businesses with various tools for improving or supporting communications with their customers. However, it is not clear whether or not companies are taking full advantage of wide range of marketing communications on web sites. Some firms may not utilize the full range of online communications tools as it requires high financial and human resource investment to keep effective corporate web sites (Perry et al., 2000).
The goal of any business is to reduce the amount of time and expenditure to reach the right customers and fulfill the transaction. Choosing the most relevant e-communication tools is important for companies to cut down the latency and overhead in B2C (business to consumer) interaction and find the right consumer at the right time in an appropriate and efficient way. In deciding whether to utilize particular E-communication tools, individual organizations need to consider the properties of these tools respectively. The benefits of each tool should be weighed against what the company perceives as the costs. Therefore, understanding E-communication tools better will enable more effective and efficient use of E-communication expenditures, and lead to greater consumer satisfaction and business profitability (Kalyanam et al., 2002).
This paper evaluates how these strategic internet communicators currently target customers, drive purchasing behaviors and how companies should choose the most relevant communication tools to create profitability. It also suggests how companies would need to go about and the various tools to be used in order to attract the customers of the desired target market.
Evidence has shown that online advertising can be an effective marketing tool (Romeo et al., 2004).
Solely in The UK, Internet advertising spent was    1,366.4 million in 2005, this is a 7.8% share of all advertising spend (Chaffey, 2005). As shown on the table 2, the search advertising is the companies most preferred from of e-communication technique. This is due to the fact that search engine is considered to be the most effective and cost efficient way of advertising online ( ).
Maximizing the efficiency of online advertising is the most essential strategy of utilizing this e-communication tool. Apart from theoretical aspects, businesses are facing two main issues when advertising online. First, it has been suggested that the interactive e-techniques shift the control from advertisers to customers (Gordon et al., 1997). Customers are now free to search information they want and ignore other information. However, some web advertising does not appear with the editorial content, customers must therefore click past it to get the content. This kind of advertising may be distracting and irritating for its audience. Moreover, the distinction between advertising and content is not clear. Some customers visit the company 's website for its content but sometimes are exposed to the promotional messages. This may not help the business increase its sales but conversely may have bad impact on its reputation. Therefore, being able to distinguish advertising from editorial content would be important in creating efficiency when using online advertisement (Gordon et al., 1997). Second, some efforts have been put on making internet advertising entertaining to attract customers, which may contain games or cartoons. However, survey of 500 internet users suggests that they prefer information rather than fun and games (Gordon et al., 1997). This shows that internet is still used as a source of fun and enjoyment rather than as a source of information gateway.
From the positive insight, online advertising cost is lower than traditional advertising as its expense is subsidized by advertising revenues. Similarly, it costs the web visitor less than to watch some television channels, especially in the more developed countries. Moreover, the reach of the internet towards its customers could be more if used properly and efficiently (Brown, 2004).
The online advertising will significantly reduce the global advertising costs, and help businesses reach a global audience more easily, cheaply and quickly. Some small and medium sized companies who offering specialized niche product, would be able to find the critical mass of customers through internet advertising. Internet 's low cost communications make it possible for firms with limited capital to become global marketers at an early stage in their development (Hamill, 1997).
Furthermore, advertisers can understand more about their customers by technically collecting consumer information, such as demographics of average viewer or visitor. Whereas, firms may pay more for online advertisement than traditional advertising for this reason.
The different advertising forms depend on the type of product. For instance, informative advertising may be preferred for high involvement or industrial products, entertaining advertising may be suitable for low involvement consumer goods (Gordon et al., 1997). Advertising spent may vary significantly between different industries and different firms within an industry (Perry et al., 2000). According to Perry (2000), merchandise stores are most likely to utilize direct marketing such as e-mail, conversely, transportation companies are the least likely to utilize direct marketing.
Several factors need to be considered before choosing online communication tools, which can be inferred from table 1 (Moorey, 2004):
According to the latest survey conducted by Dave Chaffey (2006), on his website, in-house e-mail list is considered to be the best form of online communication tools among various surveyed companies, followed by paid search advertisements and behavioral targeting. On the other hand, the rented e-mail list technique was the least favorable among the companies followed by pop-ups and e-mail newsletter advertisements (Chaffey, web reference).
Compared with traditional forms of communications such as the telephone, postal and fax, E-mail is a more cost effective, flexible and reliable method, particularly when long distances or different time zones are involved, and it is not limited by real-time presence (Hamill, 1997). This is commonly used by large companies, however, for SME 's (small and medium size companies), the problem is not if they can afford to install an e-mail facility, but whether could they afford not to. As more and more competitors begin to form relationships with their customers, suppliers or partners by using electronic communications, SME 's who are not involved will face being out of the network.
Compared with other communication channels, e-mail presents the highest return on investment by a wide margin, according to the Direct Marketing Association (Magill, 2006). As the DMA reported, E-mail returned $57.25 for every dollar spent on it in 2005, whereas non-e-mail internet marketing produced $22.52 (Magill, 2006). What this shows is that e-mail is a more profitable means of communicating than any other form of online communicating with customers. However, according to the DMA 's research, the e-mail 's ROI is decreasing in the foreseeable future and the non-email internet marketing will keeping rising annually (Magill, 2006). Given this trend it would be wise to combine different online communication channels to maximize the internet marketing efficiency and profitability.
A successful case is that Toys R US (TRU, toy retailer) won its competitors by creating a low-cost e-mail collection and fulfillment strategy. Pressured by Wal-Mart, Cost-cutter and Amazon, TRU deduced an e-mail marketing strategy to build its traffic for Christmas 2005. An e-mail with coupons was sent to 2 million registered members, which allowed each recipient to print coupons once per day for 12 solid days. The response was over plan at 15,000 coupons redeemed, and the inventory for some items was sold out quickly (Joyce, 2006).
Interesting that e-mail rented list and e-mail ads are successful for some, but not others showing effort is needed to find the right list. The top 2 items, E-mail and paid search are no surprise, but behavioral targeting of online ads is - this service is only just taking off in UK, e.g. available on FT.com (Chaffey, D; web reference).
Affiliate marketing can be described as a commission based arrangement where the publishers and merchants (retailers) can share the revenue generated by traffic. Amazon.com (book seller) for instance, sold products from hundreds of other companies and received the commission on books sold. Affiliate marketing benefits both the affiliate and the merchant.
The affiliate marketing channel has improved over the years. The current statistics show that the future usage of affiliate marketing is set to grow at an alarming rate of 60 % per year. More and more companies prefer this type of e-communication channel over others due to its ease of compatibility among other websites and companies ().
According to Chaffey (2004), for online-only brands such as ASOS.com (fashion internet store), an efficient affiliate program can create over 30% of sales, and for those traditional brands, it may double the percentage of sales. The benefits for the merchants can be listed as follows: (1). Commission fee is paid after the product has been purchased, and it will largely reduce the risk of advertising. (2). Compared with Pay per click search engine marketing where retailers have to pay for the click through irrespective of whether visitors purchase anything, affiliate marketing is more efficient. Therefore, it is relatively easy for affiliate control its expenditure on customer acquisition (Chaffey, 2004). (3). Compared with other advertising media such as news and magazine sites, affiliate sites enlarge the advertiser 's reach to a wider audience (Chaffey, 2004).
In theory, e-business can follow the successful model of Amazon who has its own program linking thousands of affiliate sites to build up sales (Chaffey, 2004). In practice, companies can corporate with an affiliate network provider such as Commission Junction () or Trade Doubler ( ) to manage tracking and payment, which is more cost effective than building an in-house affiliate marketing team. Meanwhile, as the affiliate network charge on merchants for each sale, if possible it is wise to work with different preferred affiliates. Meanwhile, the merchant should consider the damage which would cause on the reputation from the less ethical affiliates.
The biggest problem of affiliates marketing is the competition on Pay per click (PPC). As affiliates can use sponsored links to the PPC network, this may increase the advertising cost of the merchant, and make the competition more severe when the advertiser 's ads are listed with other competitors' together.
Through affiliates, some customers visit company 's website only for checking information on a product they might have already bought. Moreover, sometimes the company has to pay more than once for the same customer. Due to this fact, some companies are reducing the investment on affiliates marketing or even stop it. Dabs (e-retailer) for example, which sells electronic products, has already stopped its affiliate marketing and only uses paid-for search on Google as its online marketing tool (Chaffey, 2006). Virtually, this had no effect on its sales.
Additionally, affiliates also use search engine optimization which may make it difficult for retailers to appear in the natural listings of a search engine as they are constrained on site design (Chaffey, 2004).
More and more business owners are putting much effort on having an good online presence by paying huge sums of money on search engines, PPC and other online communicating strategies, but a few realize the importance of online PR. According to Lica (2006), online PR is similar to offline PR, which refers to activities used to build up public awareness for companies products or services and business goodwill. It includes forums, blogs and social networks. Online PR has transformed many small local businesses into global players and helped them grow faster (Lica, 2006).
Online PR 's advantages can be examined from three aspects: (1). It is cheaper than offline PR but more powerful. A good online press release could reach thousands of audiences within quick time and when needed by the company, could publish it offline as well. As it is posted on other websites with back links to company 's website, there is no need to invest on buying or renting links (Lica, 2006). (2). It is an easy way to submit a press release online. Additionally, some free press release distribution services are available. (3). A paid service may help the company ensure the effective text editing and thereby lead to natural SEO optimization (Lica, 2006).
To succeed in achieving online PR marketing goals, a company might consider choosing a mix of online PR tools and perhaps alerts like Google Alerts to monitor brand performance.
Blogs can be as influential as newspapers and other offline media, as there is an increasing number of people reading blogs regularly. A blog containing useful, unique and exceptional information will help a business generate more traffic and strengthen its brand image (Lica, 2006).
Cooper Tire, presenting sponsor of a football website, has more than 11,000 unique visitors followed its blog. Those football fans spend an average three minutes and 17 seconds reading the daily postings (Joyce, 2006). This statistics just shows the importance and relevance of blogs in today 's world of online PR. The blog reinforced Cooper tire 's brand awareness among its fans and enhanced the company 's exposure in public. In this case, blog is an effective model to generate income.
Article is a powerful online public relations tool, as it enables the businesses to share knowledge with the world, obtain public respect and gain customers' recognition (Lica, 2006). Moreover, its efficiency is easy to be measured by the number of back links it generates.
Unlike blogs, articles are more trustworthy and concrete as it is always or at least most often followed by some amount of credible source authenticating the facts. Blogs on the other hand are just various individuals' assumptions and notions about various things, which may or may not be authenticated. Considering the facts, the importance of both blogs as well as articles should not be ignored by the companies who are into online PR as peoples voices and opinions are ultimately form the customers of the respective companies products.
Not surprisingly, the utilization of search engine was more common among smaller firms than larger companies, as they are more likely to pay search engines for higher placement (Asbill, 2007).
Apple vacations have been successful in using SEM (search engine management) to maximize its visibility. When coming to searching for a vacation or trip online, Apple vacations is usually found at the top few of the list - 5 th in the list while searching for the term "vacations" on Google. Although this is the first method they used to advertise outside its traditional ad, their paid search program performs about 200% above the company 's break-even ROI (Jobannes, 2006). The key factor is to collaborate with specialists in SEM and maximize the effort on designing word search categories specific to customers' needs. To capture customers' eyeballs, building up a trusted brand image is quiet crucial when applying search engine tools.
Another issue is that when people requiring some information, search engines can be time consuming, as those people may not be experienced net users and the information required is not specific (Hamill, 1997). Due importance needs to be given to getting the keywords associated with the product or the company right.
Pay per click is undoubtedly one of the most cost effective and measurable way for companies to get people visiting their web site (Guava, 2005). Most leading search engines are selling sponsored listings to companies, which allow these firms to create ads and choose related keywords. When people are searching information by using one of these keywords, the company 's web site and ads may appear in the sponsored results. At the same time, in most cases, users will read the brief summary about the company 's products or services that appears with the search result. This is a simple way to acquiring customers and increasing the chance of the individual making enquiry for the services or purchase (Guava, 2005).
Companies may corporate and integrate with different search engines regardless of its location, whereas, they must consider which brand is the most popular one for the target customer and which one meets the company 's budget. Optimizing the Return on Investment (Advertising cost v profit) should be the primary aim for any business when applying pay per click tool. As the search engine processes on a bid system and the cost of each click through may differ. Generally, costs per click start as 8 pence and the higher the company bids, the higher up the rankings the listing will appear (Dminformatics, 2006). In return, the search engine will charge the company for management fee which is based on a percentage of spent amount and a fixed cost per click depending on the volume of clicks. To summarise, the benefits of Pay per click can be listed as follows:
Although online communications tools has largely enhanced businesses' brand awareness and stimulated sales since the communicating technology being mature, some companies are starting to move budget away from online to offline advertising, particularly affiliates. One of the main reasons is company can get better ROI from offline activities. Some companies have realised that the costs of online customer acquisition are increasing consistently. As for affiliate marketing and pay per click search, the big issue is that companies have to pay for every click and the cost is keeping increase.
For smaller companies, they need to consider if they can afford being charged multiple times for the same sale and if they can achieve its marketing goals by utilizing affiliates. Additionally, they need to build up commission payment policy and stick to it. Also, it has to be seen to it that the PPC model is well tracked and monitored from time to time.
An area of concern, nevertheless, is regarding user privacy violations. There need to be a right balance between the usage of such technology with user 's rights and privacy issues. There is always a concern and a sense of worry in the minds of the user as in where and to whom are their personal details been disclosed to. There need to be some sort of a stricter law governing the various companies and their use of techno logy over the internet (Huaiqing Wang, et al; 1998).
On a final note, it is worth mentioning that the prospect of internet marketing and online advertisements is at a high right now. The future of online communication looks very bright for companies planning to go the 'e' business way. The respective company needs to only be careful regarding the channel used for communication. With the right usage and implementation of the channels, it - the internet, is the ideal medium to promote a company successfully.
