Group X16 of module ES2A6 comprised three men and two women, all British except for one of the women who was from China. At first this promised to be a fairly dynamic group and conversation in our first meeting was energetic, though the Chinese member of the group unfortunately was n't present - her attendance and contribution throughout the project has been minimal, an issue which I will address later on. We began with a brainstorming session and came up with many ideas for potential businesses, leaving the meeting with the task of thinking up further initiatives in preparation for our next meeting.
We then met weekly to discuss further ideas in preparation for the "elevator" pitch. However, each week brought different ideas, and every time we decided on a final idea the group would have changed its mind by the following meeting. Though we said on several occasions that this was the final plan, the week before the "elevator" pitch we still were unsure exactly what our plan was, let alone having done sufficient research for it. We eventually decided on selling energy-saving and CFL lightbulbs online to offices, and refused to change it for lack of time.
Writing the "elevator" pitch was even more frustrating, largely due to scheduling an all-day meeting the weekend before the pitch and our group leader emailing on the Friday night to say he'd hurt his foot and gone home for the weekend. I subsequently took over, with the group 's permission, as unofficial group leader and after a very long day 's work the group managed to cooperate sufficiently to create a presentation. The group leader and I presented it and answered questions, though some of the more technical details were answered by other group members whom had done specific research into those areas of the plan.
Following the "elevator" pitch, we began on the Business Plan. Communication over the Christmas vacation was almost non-existent so on returning to university we had very little planned. Our group meetings were increasingly frustrating with certain members making no effort to be on time or have done any work if they turned up at all. We agreed on a deadline to have a draft of our individual sections as a motivational goal but I was very upset to find I was the only one who had prepared anything. However, this seemed to affect the others who suddenly made more effort as the deadline approached. Our final hurdle was to compile sufficient information against a tight deadline in a group with a somewhat fractious nature, and after many days spent working together and helping each other out we finally got it finished. Interestingly, it was very apparent that two members of the group had done easily twice that of the other two, with the Chinese member having contributed nothing whatsoever to the final Business Plan.
One issue our group faced was a lack of leadership and a lack of respect. We had a nominal group leader but he was n't always on time and often had n't done the work, and could be easily distracted during meetings and let the conversation wander. I feel that I am quite a natural leader and I find myself directing most group activities I become involved with, through having quite a forceful and professional outlook, and acquiring both attention to detail and a wider scope of the task in hand, so inevitably I soon became the unofficial group leader. However, I felt that I was not entirely treated with respect by all of the group, and I suspect this was because I was the only female and also the only proactive one and the male members did n't like me being so forceful and controlling, whether consciously or not. I think this is an issue that must arise often in the workplace, particularly in the male-dominated world of engineering, but I found it very interesting to observe and work around, and in the end my clear organisation and forward thinking earned me their respect, at least in the manner in which they spoke to me.
As for the other members of the group, there were no very clear roles. This was possibly an issue we should have addressed early in order to maintain some professionalism and structure to the group, but in keeping it less rigid there was a slightly friendlier atmosphere. We split up tasks for research such as finance, market research, competition and promotion. This worked quite well, although there was still a lack of motivation. The fifth (Chinese) member of our group was very unreliable and made little effort to do research in between meetings and would sometimes not turn up, sending us somewhat cryptic messages explaining her absence. We all recognised that her language skills were not of a particularly high standard and wanted to give her the best chance possible but were unwilling to set her important tasks as she often did n't fully understand her job or simply would n't bring anything to the next meeting. We wrote her detailed emails so she could look up words if she did n't understand them when spoken, and tried to explain everything as clearly as possible.
Of the other two members of the group, one turned up to most meetings late and usually hungover, rarely having done any preparatory work. As the deadline for the business plan approached however, he did make a little more effort and when other distractions were removed he worked well. The other member was always keen to criticise and rarely provided helpful suggestions, but would work grudgingly if necessary. The team mainly suffered from a lack of motivation and forethought, which I feel could only be solved by an increased maturity and a project that the group is more interested in.
Working in this group situation is all very well in terms of levelling marks and is certainly an easier way to get large and complicated projects such as writing a business plan done, but it penalises the conscientious members of a group. Having clearly spent far more time on this project than the rest of my group together, I feel the system is unjust and in that respect would rather have done the project individually to my own timeframe and quality. As it is, quality has been hampered by others' slacking and at times the project has been unnecessarily stressful on account of their laziness. I realise there is no perfect way of conducting group work and that it is an important skill for the workplace, particularly in engineering where large scale projects involve a great deal of teamwork, but at a professional level the group members would be selected for their prowess or teamworking abilities, not at random as they have here, so I would imagine a professional team to work far better than we have.
