The essay examines the operation of the 'Leniency Notice' as a weapon to destabilise the effects of Cartels which are prohibited by Articles 81 and 82 of the EC treaty or Sections 1 and 2 of the Sherman Act. The essay will begin by giving a definition of the 'European Commissions' Leniency Notice and Cartels followed by a concise discussion of the difficulty of detecting and proving the existence of a cartel which consumers must view in light of the 'leniency notice'. The essay will attempt to address the issues derived from the policy objectives of imposing penalties on those individuals who commit an offence but in effect are not penalised. This essay will address more specifically the operation of the notice in the EU 'although reference will be made to the US antitrust laws where appropriate given its increasing influence in a domestic and EC context." The Commissions notice was firstly introduced in 1996. However, it was revised and issued in February 2002 as it was seen that the notice clearly 'did not emulate the 'DOJ' success in a number of respects." Therefore, the essay will most importantly discuss the limitations of the operation of the EC notice in light of the successes of the 'United States' notice. Nevertheless, despite its limitations its successes so far are promising and undeniably models as a weapon for the beginning of the destruction of cartels. The essay will conclude that the operation of the notice may still have to be improved before it can be as successful as the US notice. Commission notice on immunity from fines and reduction of fines in cartel cases (2002/C 45/03). Hereafter EC Hereafter Notice K.Middleton, B. Rodger, Angus MacCulloch, Cases and Materials on UK and EC Competition Law, (2003),Oxford University Press, at Preface. Department of Justice. Hereafter DOJ C.Harding and J.Joshua, Regulating cartels in Europe, (2003), First Edition,Oxford University Press, at P.217 Hereafter US.
The EC notice guarantees full immunity, as well of a reduction, in fines of an undertaking who 'volunteers self-incriminating information concerning a cartel...in which they have participated. They do so in exchange for' immunity from fines once stringent conditions are met' prior to or during an investigation. The notice aims to protect the interests of consumers by limiting and if possible eradicating the operations of hard core cartels. By 'hard core cartels I mean price fixing, bid rigging, and territorial and product allocations'' with the aim of restricting competition, which in turn harms consumers. Cartels are predominantly conducted on a covert basis, this thereby makes the difficulty of detecting cartels an onerous one. However, cartels are fissile in nature. Therefore, the notice aims to destabilise the operation of the cartel by piercing the unstable secrecy which surrounds it and eventually terminate the cartel. Furthermore, the commission has to provide  'sufficiently precise and coherent' evidence in order to prove the existence of the cartel. Thus, the operation of the notice 'benefits the commission allowing it not only to pierce the cloak of secrecy... but also to obtain insider evidence of the cartel infringement' which in turn helps to detect the existence of a cartel and 'tackles the problem the Commission faces in getting hold of sufficient information to establish the existence of infringements." Therefore, the operation of the notice must be viewed in light of the difficulty of detecting and proving the existence of cartels. S. Blake and D. Schnichels, "Leniency Following Modernisation: Safeguarding Europe 's Leniency Programmes" (2004) 2 Competition Policy Newsletter 7. See Art. 9, 10, 11 Commission notice on immunity from fines and reduction of fines in cartel cases (2002/C 45/03) KY P.Ewing, Competition rules for the 21st century , (2002), First Edition, Kluwer Law International A.Jones and B.Sufrin, EC Competition Law, (2004), Second Edition, Oxford University Press, at p788 and See case of 'Woodpulp' J. D. Hunter and S. Hornsby, "New Incentives for Whistle blowing": Will the E.C.Commissions Notice Bear Fruit" E.C.L.R. 1997, 18(1), 38-41.
The interests of consumers in ensuring that such practices are detected and brought to an end outweigh the policy objectives of imposing penalties on those individuals whom have committed an offence but who fully cooperate with the competition authority. Despite this, retributive concerns have arisen in regard to the operation of the notice. This is because the notice 'compromises some core values of criminal and penal jurisprudence, by excusing and rewarding a major offender' in a cartel. Therefore, the notice may be seen as a social and criminal limitation as a whole. However, this limitation can be justified in light of the following argument. The notice is 'not...available to a cartel member who...coerced other members of the cartel." Therefore,  'serious delinquency within the cartel will be recognised." Thus, consumers are assured that those cartel members whom coerced, and played 'a determining role' will be penalised and exempt from the benefits of leniency. Further, in violations like cartels there will be several parties involved therefore, 'even though one party gets off, there will be others to prosecute, and their prosecutions will be more certain." This means that the policy objectives of imposing penalties on those individuals who have committed an offence and should be punished are not compromised so that cartel practices are detected and brought to an end. Hence, 'this new notice should not, in any way, be understood as reflecting a more lenient approach in the fight against...anti-competitive practices." In light of this argument, consumers should view the notice positively as retributive arguments have been addressed within the operation of the notice. C.Harding and J.Joshua, Regulating cartels in Europe, (2003), First Edition,Oxford University Press, at P.227 Ibid page 227 and see Art. 11(c) Commission notice on immunity from fines and reduction of fines in cartel cases (2002/C 45/03). Ibid p227.
Harding and J.Joshua, Regulating cartels in Europe, (2003), First Edition,Oxford University Press, at P.227 Report On Leniency Programme To Fight Hard Core Cartels, DAFFE/CLP(2001)13 Mario Monti, European Commissioner in charge of Competition Policy The fight against Cartels Summary of Mr Monti 's talk to EMAC EMAC Brussels, 11 September 2002, SPEECH/02/384 Date: 12/09/2002 Accessible at.
In order to discuss the limitations of the EC notice in light of the US notice it is important to mention that 'the US Leniency means immunity from prosecution' and 'in the EU program; leniency is described in terms of reductions in fines." This is because infringements of competition law in the 'European Union' do not give rise to criminal liability but in the US it does. The limitations of the EC notice will be discussed as an entity and also in light of the successes of the US notice. Report On Leniency Programme To Fight Hard Core Cartels, DAFFE/CLP(2001)13 Ibid Hereafter EU.
The absence of criminal liability is one of the limitations of the EU competition law, which in turn adversely affects the operation of the notice. This can be explained in terms of the fact that, immunity from criminal sanctions provide more of an incentive for an individual or a corporation in a cartel to come forward and win the race to the courtroom door. This may be because 'businessmen do not like being labeled as criminals' thereby risking their reputation and the implications of a criminal record. Therefore, criminal liability creates fear and acts as a severe sanction for cartel activity, which in turn enforces the use of the notice. The US notice is an example of this as it has continued to be successful because 'it benefits from its location in a context of criminal justice." In turn, the EC notice must provide the same equivalent version of this severe penalty in order to provide a foundation for the effective use of the notice. This is created in the form of imposing high fines for cartel activity, which the commission has been doing. There is no doubt that high fines deter companies from entering into a cartel and creates a strong incentive for companies to take advantage of the notice by gaining immunity. However, despite this, firms may still find ways of compensating these fines for example, 'passing fines on to customers in the form of higher prices, companies can indemnify individuals." In contrast 'a prison sentence cannot be compensated by any means." Thus, the penalty of high fines may not be enough of a serious sanction to deter individuals from engaging in cartel activity as 'a jurisdiction without...criminal sanctions will never be as effective at inducing amnesty applications as a program that does." Hence, this acts as a potentially very important limitation of the effect that the lack of criminal sanctions has on the operation of the notice. Therefore, It is suggested 'that the European Union should introduce criminal sanctions at the European level' for cartel activity. Patriicia Hanh Rosochowicz, "THE APPROPRIATENESS OF CRIMINAL SANCTIONS IN THE ENFORCEMENT OF COMPETITION LAW" (2004) European Competition Law Review C.Harding and J.Joshua, Regulating cartels in Europe, (2003), First Edition,Oxford University Press, at P221 R.Whish, Competition Law, (2003), Fifth Edition, Lexis Nexis UK, at p456 Patriicia Hanh Rosochowicz, "THE APPROPRIATENESS OF CRIMINAL SANCTIONS IN THE ENFORCEMENT OF COMPETITION LAW" (2004) European Competition Law Review S.D. Hammond, Cornerstones of an Effective Leniency Program, paper presented at the ICN Workshop on Leniency Programs (Sydney, November 2004), accessible at   Patriicia Hanh Rosochowicz, "THE APPROPRIATENESS OF CRIMINAL SANCTIONS IN THE ENFORCEMENT OF COMPETITION LAW" (2004) European Competition Law Review.
In the 'Commissions Notice' Article 31 expressly states that: Commission notice on immunity from fines and reduction of fines in cartel cases (2002/C 45/03) Commission notice on immunity from fines and reduction of fines in cartel cases (2002/C 45/03).
Therefore, 'a third party injured by the cartels actions may commence civil proceedings' against that undertaking before their own national courts and plaintiffs may also 'rely on evidence drawn from the commission in their plea." This was evident in the 'vitamins' case as Aventis though given immunity was  'subsequently sued...with its fellow conspirators in national courts." Thus, undertakings must consider this fact before taking advantage of the notice. This may undermine the effectiveness of the notice; because it 'may serve in time as a disincentive to undertakings to take advantage of the leniency programme' which in turn restricts the operation of the notice and its successes. However, it has been stated, though, in the US context, that the 'risk of civil consequences has not prevented the leniency programme from being a success' and that there is a 'lower risk of civil actions in Europe." Further, the commission imposes very high fines for cartel activity and immunity from these fines may well compensate for the risk of paying fines for third party actions. However, despite this argument this may still be a disincentive for a prospective applicant. A.Jones and B.Sufrin, EC Competition Law, (2004), Second Edition, Oxford University Press, at p789 See case Berian U.K. Limited v. BPB Industries Plc and Another [1996] E.C.C. 46.
Vitamins Case [2003] 4 CMLR 1030 A.Jones and B.Sufrin, EC Competition Law, (2004), Second Edition, Oxford University Press, at p1142 Ibid Donal McElwee "SHOULD THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION ADOPT "AMNESTY PLUS" IN ITS FIGHT AGAINST HARD-CORE CARTELS" E.C.L.R. 2004, 25(9), 558-565 Ibid.
Similarly it is with regret that 'there is no single leniency procedure by which an applicant may make an approach to the EC commission." In other words a 'one stop leniency shop' whereby an applicant may 'be assured leniency in all the member states." It is therefore, in the interests of the applicant to apply for leniency in all the national states where leniency programmes operate and at exactly the same time. However, some member states do not have leniency policies and some member states that do, may have 'rendered cartel behaviour criminal' like in the United Kingdom. Therefore, a 'complex European patchwork of leniency programmes' exists for applicants to negotiate. Furthermore, complex situations may arise, whereby 'individuals with potential criminal exposure under Member State laws will not co-operate with leniency applications by their employers' within the EC unless those 'individuals have already obtained leniency protection with the relevant Member State or states. This means that, without the cooperation of individuals specifically involved in the cartel, companies may not be able to provide specific and relevant documentation to secure immunity or a reduction from fines. Thus, companies may be reluctant to apply for leniency in such a complex environment. However, this limitation may be avoided if the EC were to make 'a public commitment not to disclose the names of participating individuals affiliated with successful applicants." Therefore, participating individuals would be protected from criminal liability in member states and multiple jurisdictions and in turn this would strengthen the notice. This latter problem has been resolved in the US, as the DOJ has agreed 'not to disclose the information obtained from amnesty applicants to foreign authorities without prior consent of the applicant." However, across 'Europe there is a less predictable assurance of confidentiality' as there are as yet 'no specific rules on the subject." The commission may not conform to the US approach in light of the 'Bank Austria' case. It is stated that this ruling may encourage the commission to publish information rather than restricting confidential information. This may reduce the effectiveness of the notice. However, in regards to the limitation discussed before the confidentiality problem was addressed the commission has recognised this limitation. As a result, the 'European Competition Network' created a model leniency programme. 'The ECN programme sets out the treatment which an applicant can anticipate in any ECN jurisdiction' and thereby ensures that 'potential leniency applicants are not discouraged from applying as a result of the discrepancies between the existing leniency programmes." However, this is not binding on the individual member states. It is simply a model law. Its successes are based, on if member states align their respective programmes, with the ECN model programme. Most importantly, it may help 'overcome the complexities that possibly deter applicants from using leniency programmes, and assist the emergence of a convergent leniency policy across the EU. M.Furse, Competition Law of the EC and UK, (2006), Fifth Edition, Oxford University Press, at p 120 C. Gauer and Maria Jaspers "DESIGNING A EUROPEAN SOLUTION FOR A "ONE STOP LENIENCY SHOP" 2006 European Competition Law Review M.Furse, Competition Law of the EC and UK, (2006), Fifth Edition, Oxford University Press, at p 120 A.Jones and B.Sufrin, EC Competition Law, (2004), Second Edition, Oxford University Press, at p1142 C.Harding and J.Joshua, Regulating cartels in Europe, (2003), First Edition,Oxford University Press, at P 223 Christof R.A. Swaak and D. Jarrett Arp. "A TEMPTING OFFER: IMMUNITY FROM FINES FOR CARTEL CONDUCT UNDER THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION'S NEW LENIENCY NOTICE" E.C.L.R. 2003, 24(1), 9-18 ibid ibid C.Harding and J.Joshua, Regulating cartels in Europe, (2003), First Edition,Oxford University Press, at P 223 Ibid. Ibid. Judgment of the Court of First Instance May 30, 2006 in Case T-198/03, Bank Austria Creditanstalt AG v Commission. Hereafter ECN ECN MODEL LENIENCY PROGRAMME, From Ibid. "COMMISSIONER REVIEWS RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN THE FIGHT AGAINST CARTELS" EU Focus 2006, 197, 6-7.
In order to create a successful notice there needs to be a continuous and increased fear of detection within cartel activity. One of the weaknesses of the EC notice is that there may not be enough procedures in the notice to create this. This can be seen in light of the US program which not only imposes severe sanctions but, has also, created a number of 'proactive strategies for uncovering antitrust offences." One of these proactive strategies is the provision of Amnesty Plus. "Amnesty Plus" offers a company caught engaging in illegal cartel activity in 'one...market, the incentive to admit participation in a second unrelated market' as a reward for its co-operation, 'the corporation may be granted full immunity for being the first to reveal the existence of a cartel in the second market' and may also 'receive a... reduction in fine... in the first market." The lack of amnesty plus within the notice could be described as a criticism of the notice. Amnesty plus heightens the fear of detection for an undertaking because, if a company is under investigation in one market they are automatically sensitive to further, investigations in other markets. Therefore, companies become fearful that, 'if they do not act first, someone else will and they will lose their right to immunity. Secondly amnesty plus increases the incentive of an undertaking to reveal cartel activity that it may be involved in, in other markets. This can be justified in light of the fact that 'companies who have colluded in one... market are more likely to have colluded in another market." 'Interbrew ' is an example of a company that volunteered information of another cartel to the Commission during investigation of a separate geographic market." Thus, if the commission provides amnesty plus, this may 'induce corporations into effectively doing the authority 's work for them." Further, consumers 'would profit from cartels being dissolved much sooner than otherwise." Without amnesty plus a company has no incentive to inform the commission about any further cartel activities in which it is involved in. In effect, it may simply mean that a company, whom have lost immunity in one market will simply do all they can to make sure that they are not detected in another market. Thus, making it almost impossible for the commission to detect further cartel activity and thereby 'existing cartels will go unreported and unpunished." Therefore, the 'European Commission missed a great opportunity to implement...amnesty plus in Europe." And as a result this may limit the successes of the notice. Donal McElwee "SHOULD THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION ADOPT "AMNESTY PLUS" IN ITS FIGHT AGAINST HARD-CORE CARTELS" E.C.L.R. 2004, 25(9), 558-565 Ibid Ibid Ibid Ibid Ibid Find citation Donal McElwee "SHOULD THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION ADOPT "AMNESTY PLUS" IN ITS FIGHT AGAINST HARD-CORE CARTELS" E.C.L.R. 2004, 25(9), 558-565 Ibid Ibid S.D. Hammond, Cornerstones of an Effective Leniency Program, paper presented at the ICN Workshop on Leniency Programs (Sydney, November 2004), accessible at   Donal McElwee "SHOULD THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION ADOPT "AMNESTY PLUS" IN ITS FIGHT AGAINST HARD-CORE CARTELS" E.C.L.R. 2004, 25(9), 558-565.
One of the most essential characteristics for an effective and successful notice is certainty and transparency. This is important because prospective applicants need to be able to 'predict with a high degree of certainty how it will be treated if it reports the conduct and what the consequences will be if it does not." This can be explained further, companies when deciding whether to apply for leniency, mainly do not do it for moral reasons. They mainly conduct a cost benefit analysis to see whether it is economically in their interests to do so. If this cost benefit analysis is patented by ambiguities in transparency and certainty, it is less likely that companies may take such risks and therefore, may be a deterrent factor in their decision to apply. Unfortunately, within the operation of the notice there is a consistent limitation of transparency and certainty. This is why the 1996 notice failed and though the new notice was 'designed to ensure greater predictability' regrettably; it is still lacking this in its operation. S.D. Hammond, Cornerstones of an Effective Leniency Program, paper presented at the ICN Workshop on Leniency Programs (Sydney, November 2004), accessible at   "COMMISSIONER REVIEWS RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN THE FIGHT AGAINST CARTELS" EU Focus 2006, 197, 6-7.
The notice states that: Commission notice on immunity from fines and reduction of fines in cartel cases (2002/C 45/03).
The dawn raid sufficiency test could be argued to lack predictability as 'there is no defined legal standard for the ordering of a dawn raid investigation." Therefore, whether evidence submitted is sufficient for a dawn raid is given on a purely discretionary basis. This has a negative effect on the operation of the notice because a would be co-operating entity, would not be able to assess whether the evidence they have submitted is of a sufficient degree to enable a dawn raid and thereby, once further conditions are met gain immunity from fines. Therefore, though the commission has increased the predictability of the notice by giving corporate entities full immunity if it meets the dawn raid sufficiency test '... the Commission seems to take away with one hand what it has given with the other." Through, the invariably discretionary dawn raid test. Further, it is complicated by the fact that there is at present 'no way to put in a "marker" holding the company 's place as first in line, while it gathers sufficient evidence to "perfect" the marker' if the undertaking should fail the discretionary dawn raid test on its first approach to the commission. The lack of a marker system creates uncertainty, which in turn reduces the predictability and transparency of the notice, for a would be co-operating entity and creates, a complex situation for the commission. This will be explained further in the following argument. The commission may be placed in an interesting position 'if a second firm comes in hoping for leniency before the dawn raid triggered by the first has been executed." In the event that this occurs theoretically the commission may have a discretion whom to prosecute (known as Prosecutorial Discretion), which reduces the transparency and predictability of the notice. Or most likely the second firm may gain leniency rather than the first firm whom failed in gaining sufficient evidence. Further, there is an increased risk, for the undertaking 'who cannot be sure whether another company has already won the race under point 8(a)." Again the US has dealt with this problem, and created a procedure, which in effect, protects the undertaking from the occurrence above. 'The US process allows companies to inform the 'DOJ of the violation' and confirm 'that it will return at a later date with a full "proffer" to "perfect" the marker put down earlier." This in turn reduces the 'higher burden akin to the EU notice to secure first place in line for immunity. Further, the US notice 'is inherently transparent because they 'have eliminated, to a great extent, the exercise of prosecutorial discretion in its application' because each company knows that if they are the first to submit evidence they will receive immunity, and they can also use the marker process, to their benefit, to ensure that they mark their place in the line. Therefore, the DOJ cannot use their own discretion to state which company should be prosecuted and which should have immunity. This strengthens the transparency of the US notice. In turn, the lack of a marker system in the EC notice may deter prospective applicants and most importantly  'such a barrier to reporting quickly is also counter to the aims of an immunity system that is meant to encourage companies to race to confess once infringements are found." Therefore, it seems that a similar process as in the US for a marker system may need to be adopted in order to improve and strengthen the certainty, transparency and predictability of the operation of the notice. However, as apart of the notice possible future revision 'a marker-style system for applying for immunity is being seriously considered' by the commission. The dawn raid test may also need to be explicitly defined; this would in turn reduce the discretionary nature of the term and may improve the predictability of the notice for a prospective undertaking. Johan Carle "THE NEW LENIENCY NOTICE" E.C.L.R. 2002, 23(6), 265-272 Ibid Michael J. Reynolds, "IMMUNITY AND LENIENCY IN EU CARTEL CASES: CURRENT ISSUES" (2006), E.C.L.R. 2006, 27(2), 82-90 C.Harding and J.Joshua, Regulating cartels in Europe, (2003), First Edition,Oxford University Press, at P 220 Ibid Michael J. Reynolds, "IMMUNITY AND LENIENCY IN EU CARTEL CASES: CURRENT ISSUES" (2006), E.C.L.R. 2006, 27(2), 82-90 Ibid Michael J. Reynolds, "IMMUNITY AND LENIENCY IN EU CARTEL CASES: CURRENT ISSUES" (2006), E.C.L.R. 2006, 27(2), 82-90 S.D. Hammond, Cornerstones of an Effective Leniency Program, paper presented at the ICN Workshop on Leniency Programs (Sydney, November 2004), accessible at  .
Michael J. Reynolds, "IMMUNITY AND LENIENCY IN EU CARTEL CASES: CURRENT ISSUES" (2006), E.C.L.R. 2006, 27(2), 82-90 Michael J. Reynolds, "IMMUNITY AND LENIENCY IN EU CARTEL CASES: CURRENT ISSUES" (2006), E.C.L.R. 2006, 27(2), 82-90.
It has been stated, that there are 'three prerequisites for implementing an effective leniency policy' namely:  'severe sanctions, heightened fear of detection, and transparency in enforcement policies." Unfortunately, the limitations discussed above, falls into these three prerequisites which may explain, why the notice may not be as effective as the US notice at present. S.D. Hammond, Cornerstones of an Effective Leniency Program, paper presented at the ICN Workshop on Leniency Programs (Sydney, November 2004), accessible at   ibid.
However, despite the limitations discussed it cannot be denied that the notice, so far has been successful in detecting and prohibiting cartel activity. Therefore, the operation of the notice should not only be discussed in light of its limitations.
One should also note that, the US notice has not always been so successful. It has had its time to develop and improve upon its limitations and the EC notice will do the same and reach more successes in time. However, it is clearly evident that the new notice has and will continue to produce better results than the 1996 notice. Nonetheless, the '1996 notice was very successful' in detecting cartels and 2001 was a remarkable year for the detection of cartels where fines reached a total of 'EUR 1.836 billion...between 1996 and 2002." Specifically 'Out of a total of 24 decisions imposing fines... firms cooperated with the Commission under the scheme in 17 cases." The notice was used in a variety of industries such as chemicals, banks, airlines, beer and paper. The year 2002 was also another successful year for the commission as five out of nine cartels, used the notice and gained immunity. This included the case of 'Sotheby 's/Christy 's ' Sothebys were fined EUR 20.4 million while Christy 's gained immunity, 'Electrical and mechanical carbon and graphite products' Morgan Crucible received full immunity and because the second undertaking Carbon Lorraine provided substantial information they received 40% reductions in their fine. Therefore, this reflects that the notice is to a great extent destabilizing cartels and corporations do see the advantages of the notice and have taken it seriously. Therefore, in practice and despite its limitations the notice has indeed 'proved a formidable tool for encouraging firms to cooperate with the commission.' A.Jones and B.Sufrin, EC Competition Law, (2004), Second Edition, Oxford University Press, at p1138 Whish, Competition Law, (2003), Fifth Edition, Lexis Nexis UK, at 456 Mario Monti European Commissioner in charge of Competition Policy The fight against Cartels Summary of Mr Monti 's talk to EMAC EMAC Brussels, 11 September 2002 IP/02/1585, 30 Oct. 2002. Decision 3 Dec, 2003, [2004] OJ L125/45 Mario Monti European Commissioner in charge of Competition Policy The fight against Cartels Summary of Mr Monti 's talk to EMAC EMAC Brussels, 11 September 2002.
It should also be noted that the commission are continuously working on the notice. This is reflected through the 'Draft Commission Notice on Immunity from fines and reduction of fines' in cartel cases which if implemented in the future will take away the discretionary nature of the dawn raid test and will introduce a discretionary marker system, as well as other proposed amendments. Therefore, the commission should be commended for their work. Available at.
The notice is effective as it addresses the difficulty of detecting and proving the existence of a cartel and also the retributive concerns surrounding leniency for cartel offenders. It has been successful since its introduction in 1996 as it has resulted in a number of cartels being detected. The limitations of the notice such as the lack of criminal sanctions, amnesty plus, a marker system and the fact that a cartel member may be liable to civil and criminal proceedings in member states and the continuous lack of transparency and certainty may reduce the effectiveness of the operation of the notice within the EU. Moreover these limitations fall into the three prerequisites needed to create a successful leniency notice, namely severe sanctions, heightened fear of detection, and transparency. Thus, it is likely that the EC notice may not as yet emulate the successes of the US notice until certain improvements have been made. The improvements consists of the introduction of criminal sanctions for cartel behaviour, the addition of amnesty plus and a marker system, the issues of confidentiality and the vagueness of the meaning of the dawn raid test are addressed and lastly if the member states are willing to align their laws with the ECN Model Leniency programme. However, it must be noted that the notice is a recent reform which needs time to develop as the US notice has had time to develop. In time the notice will create success stories like that of the US as long as it continues to improve on its limitations. The commission is no doubt working to achieve this objective, and this is reflected through the 'draft Commission Notice on Immunity from fines' and the introduction of the ECN model Law.
