Pneumatics is about the study of the mechanical properties of air and other gases. During the laboratory, we need to create and test pneumatic circuits to meet the requirements of the 6 exercises. This report includes the pneumatic diagrams obtained during the laboratory and how pneumatic link with real-life application in an automated device. Also, advantages and disadvantages of using pneumatics instead of electrical actuators as well as the importance of the air quality supplied to the system will be discussed.
Make sure the compressed air supply is connected to the Filter Regulator on the trainer board. Adjust the pressure gauge to about 1 to 2 bar or 0.1 to 0.2Mpa. Connect the Filter Regulator output to switch OV1 with a short length of pipe (4mm in diameter).
To carry out the exercise, connect the pneumatic elements in the assembly panel by using the pipe without switching on the switch.
Switch on the air supply to check whether it functions as the results described. If the circuit is not well connected, we could hear / feel the air coming out from the connecting point.
Using a 3/2 way valve, control a single acting cylinder (A) so that when a button (M) is pushed the cylinder extends and when the button is released the cylinder retracts to its starting position. Phase diagram is as follows:
This is the design of pneumatic circuit that fulfil the specification:
We observe that the rate of retracts is faster than that of extends. The phase diagram is the same as the given one.
This is to create a system that represents using a double acting cylinder to open and close a sliding door. The cylinder should open (and as such close the door) when button 1 (M1) is pressed and close (open the door) when button 2 (M2) is pressed. If pressed together nothing should happen. Assemble and Phase diagram are as follows:
This is the design of pneumatic circuit that fulfil the specification:
When M1 is pressed, the air flow to the cylinder at one side (X)while the other side(Y) is allowed to exhaust, therefore the cylinder extends. When M2 is pressed, the air flow in at side Y while exhaust at side X , so it retracts. When both button are pressed, air flow in at both side resulted that nothing happen. The phase diagram matches the given one. locations.
A double acting cylinder (A) will extend when either of 2 push-buttons (M1 and M2) are pressed or both pressed at the same time. When both buttons are released the cylinder will retract. Phase diagram is as follows:
This is the design of pneumatic circuit that fulfil the specification: (What are the Boolean logic equations for A+ and A-?).
Consider a machine that uses a pneumatic double acting cylinder to press part into a die, e.g. sheet metal into car body panels. To ensure the machine operator is away from the danger area (where they could get crushed) he must press two switches (M1 and M2) together for the cylinder to extend. A third button (M3) is used to retract the cylinder.
This is the design of pneumatic circuit that fulfil the specification: (what are the Boolean logic equations for A+ and A-?).
A push button (M1) is used to control the feeding of parts into the stamper by a cylinder (A). Once cylinder A is extended fully, a switch is triggered which signals for a second cylinder B to extend causing the stamping action. A second push button (M2) causes retraction of the cylinders. A third button(M3) will switch the eject mechanise or third cylinder (C) to extend when on and retract when switched off. A phase diagram of the proposed operation is given below. However, limitations on time and equipment may mean that some alterations and variations may have to be implemented. Therefore the extent of operation must be recorded and reported in the lab write up.
This is the design of pneumatic circuit that fulfil the specification:
When M1 is pressed, cylinder A is extending. After cylinder A fully extended, cylinder B starts to extended. When M2 is pressed, it causes retraction of cylinder A and B. When M3 is pressed, cylinder C ejects .Then it retracts when M3 is released.
We did n't get the same phase diagram as given one. There was a time delay for the retraction of cylinder B. The phase diagram that we got is as follows:
Pneumatics drives are easy to configure in potentially explosive area. For its entire service life, it is maintenance- free and it is suitable for continuous closed-loop operation. Moreover, it does not need any control or monitoring functions. Compare with electrical drives, it cost less and it can produce a higher attainable speeds. [Pneumatic components are highly resistant to vibration, sturdy and durable - virtually indestructible. Even extreme heat cannot impair corrosion-protected components.].
Pneumatic systems depend so much on the properties of the pressurised media. Require a continuous and ample supply of clean and compressed air. It cannot generate constant torque and it needs energy supply continuously. [] . Moreover, the ability to control the system parameters (flow-rate and pressure) to produce the required results (speed and torque) is often inexact and tedious.
For pneumatic systems, a continuous and ample supply of clean, compressed air is required.
Electric: torque is capable of being kept constant, a unique torque and speed combination that is not available with pneumatic systems. Attainable speeds are not as high as speeds produced by pneumatic systems.
