Over the past several decades, the visibility of child soldiers has become increasingly common. Countries such as Sierra Leone, Liberia, Somalia, Afghanistan, Columbia and East Timor, to name but a few, illustrate the ubiquity of problem. While child soldiers are covered by provisions under international law, these rules are inadequate to deal with the conditions of armed conflict in the world today. There remain significant shortcomings and gaps in these laws that leave child soldiers in a more vulnerable and precarious situation than they are in already. One of the prominent features of the contemporary use of child soldiers is that the majority of conflicts in which children engage in hostilities are internal armed conflicts.
See .
Machel (1996), paragraphs 22 and 23.
When discussing the issue of child soldiers, there are several elements that need to be addressed. The first is the issue of prohibition of the recruitment and use of children and the laws that govern such prohibition. The second is if, despite prohibition, children are used in armed conflict, how they should be treated during the conflict and if captured by enemy forces. The last issue relates more to the post-conflict situation and whether child soldiers should be held responsible and accountable for their actions if they constitute crimes against humanity or other crimes recognized under international criminal law as requiring prosecution.
This report will focus on the laws prohibiting the recruitment and use of child soldiers in addition to looking at what legal provisions exist for the treatment of child soldiers when they are used in contravention to the law. While there is also clearly a problem of the efficiency in the law 's execution and implementation, this report will not cover this issue, but will focus on the actual deficiencies of the law.
The regulation of the recruitment and participation of children in armed conflict is covered by a number of international law instruments. International humanitarian law, which regulates the conduct of hostilities, is naturally the most obvious starting point when looking at legal rules governing children in armed conflict. However, a variety of other instruments from human rights law to labour law also have relevant provisions regarding children in conflict. This section will look at the different provisions in international law concerning child soldiers, highlighting any inconsistencies and ambiguities in the law.
There are three main elements that legal rules address with regards to child soldiers. The first is the age limit, which usually revolves around discussion of whether the age of 15 or 18 should be used when determining the minimum age to engage in hostilities. The second is the issue of recruitment and whether or not it is compulsory or voluntary. Recruitment is also tied to the issue of age, particularly when addressing voluntary recruitment, which will be elaborated further below. The third main element is what type of participation is allowed and this is usually divided into direct and indirect involvement.
See Fontana (1997) who includes a fourth element, that of obligations of the state.
The ICRC 's preliminary materials for the Conference of Government Experts suggests that direct "establishes the relationship of adequate causality between the act of participation and its immediate result in military operations" (as qtd. in Mann, 1987, 45). However, Mann (1987, 46) points out that 'direct' is not strictly defined and other authors have provided illustrations for its application mostly based on the immediate threat to the adversary, rather than give a definition.
The 1949 Geneva Conventions do not discuss children in the context of combatants. While the Geneva Convention IV makes many references to children, it does so with a civilian status in mind, and while the first three Geneva Conventions focuses on combatants, they do not broach the issue of the possibility of children as combatants. The 1977 Additional Protocols on the other hand do include provisions on the recruitment and use of children during armed conflict. Article 77(2) of Protocol I states that parties to the conflict "shall take all feasible measures in order that children who have not attained the age of fifteen years do not take a direct part in hostilities and, in particular, they shall refrain from recruiting them into their armed forces." In a similar vein, Article 4(c) of Protocol II states that children under the age of 15 "shall neither be recruited in the armed forces or groups nor allowed to take part in hostilities.".
While both Protocols establish 15 as the minimum age for recruitment, Protocol I has an additional statement that when recruiting between the ages of 15 and 18, priority should be given to the oldest. This is not stated in Protocol II which governs internal armed conflicts. Since Protocol I expressly states where priority should be given, it is unclear whether this means that priorities do not need to be made in internal armed conflicts.
Art.77(2) Protocol I.
The second difference is that Protocol I makes reference to "direct" involvement in armed conflict, whereas Protocol II makes no such reference. This seems to imply that indirect involvement would be permissible in international armed conflicts. That there is a distinction between direct and indirect involvement is supported by the fact that the ICRC was opposed to the insertion of 'direct' in Protocol I, although this went unheeded.
Van Bueren (1994), 815.
There is also an ambiguity about the definition of recruitment and whether this encompasses both compulsory and voluntary enrollment. The ICRC had proposed during the drafting of Article 77(2) of Protocol I that States should refrain from accepting voluntary enrollment of children under 15, but this did not make it to the final text. Due to the fact that Geneva Convention IV expressly uses 'voluntary enlistment' this implies "a difference between recruitment and voluntary enlistment" which leaves the potential for children under 15 to enroll in the armed forces.
See Art.51.
Van Bueren, G, (1994), 813-814. Van Bueren also points out that during the second reading of the CRC, recruitment and voluntary enrollment was viewed as two separate categories by Algeria who argued that children who wished to volunteer enroll in armed forces, particularly for national liberation wars, should not be dissuaded by States even with a minimum age for recruitment, 814.
Article 38 (1) of the CRC reaffirms the rules of international humanitarian law by calling upon state parties to respect these rules relevant to the child. It also calls upon states to "take all feasible measures to ensure that persons who have not attained the age of fifteen years do not take a direct part in hostilities" and calls upon states to "refrain from recruiting any person who has not attained the age of fifteen years into their armed forces." If recruits are between the ages of 15 and 18, priority should be given to the oldest, which is a standard based in Protocol I.
Art.38(2). As in Protocol I, the word 'direct' is used.
Art.38(3).
Ibid.
Art.77(2).
The Optional Protocol to the CRC entered into force in February 2002. One of the central issues during the drafting process was in the minimum age of entry into the armed forces. It was eventually set at 18 for the direct participation in hostilities and compulsory recruitment by into the armed forces of states. However the door is left open for state parties to allow children under the age of 18 to take direct part in hostilities because of the reference to "all feasible measures" which means that in exceptional cases, a military commander may decide that it is not 'feasible' to withhold a soldier below the age of 18 from participating. In addition, the door is still left open for indirect participation. However, voluntary recruitment under the age of 18 is permitted provided that there are certain safeguards such as ensuring that it is genuinely voluntary, having the consent of parents, and reliable proof of age. On the other hand armed groups, which are distinguished from armed forces of State are not allowed "under any circumstances" to recruit or use persons under 18.
Dennis (2000), 790.
Arts. 1 and 2, Optional Protocol, CRC.
Ibid, 791.
Art.3(3), Optional Protocol, CRC.
The ILO Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention 182 commits states to "take immediate and effective measures to secure the prohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child labour" with child defined as all persons under the age of 18. The worst forms of child labour include forced or compulsory recruitment of children for use in armed conflict.
Art. 3(a).
The African Charter, like the CRC, reaffirms the rules of international humanitarian law, calling on state parties to respect these rules which affect children. The Charter requires state parties to "take all necessary measures to ensure that no child shall take a direct part in hostilities and refrain in particular, from recruiting any child." The novelty in the Charter which sets it apart from other instruments is that the rules "also apply to children in situations of internal armed conflicts, tension and strife." The utility of this is that the threshold of conflict is not as high as that required for Protocol II to take effect.
Art.22(1). Article 2 of the African Charter defines a child as "every human being below the age of 18 years.".
Art. 22(2).
Art.22(3).
Although international criminal law is essentially part of the enforcement mechanism of international humanitarian law, and hence does not come into play during the conflict but after it, the crimes under its jurisdiction are indicative of what is or is not legally permissible during war. The Rome Statue of the International Criminal Court defines war crimes as including the conscription or enlistment of children under the age of 15 years into national armed forces and their use in the participation of hostilities. In the case of an internal armed conflict, armed groups also cannot conscript or enlist children under the age of 15 to participate actively in hostilities.
Another aspect of international criminal law is the prosecution of individuals for war crimes. The Special Court in Sierra Leone has jurisdiction over persons 'most responsible' for atrocities, and that includes children between the ages of 15 and 18, which was a decision subject to debate and controversy, see, Iacono (2003). However, as stated above, the prosecution of child soldiers under international criminal law will not be dealt with in this report.
Article 8(2)(b)(xxvi).
Article 8(2)(e)(vii).
This section will highlight the deficiencies in international humanitarian law regarding provisions relating to the recruitment and use of child soldiers in international humanitarian law, and how these deficiencies are not made up for in international human rights law, in addition to providing possibilities for review and difficulties and tensions that such a review may raise.
The minimum age for recruitment has been one of the most contested issues, which is why there remains discrepancy in the law in this area. Although the CRC defines a child as anyone below the age of 18 years, the possibility exists for persons under that age to engage in armed conflict.
Setting the age of 18 as the minimum age for the recruitment and participation in armed conflict does present some theoretical tension. There is a notion that at the age of 15, children do reach a certain stage of maturity and development. In the Geneva Convention IV, there are a variety of 'categories' of children such as children under 15, mothers of children under seven, children under 12, and young children. The repeated presence of 'children under 15' in Geneva Convention IV reflected how at the time of drafting "international usage...settled on an age limit of fifteen years as defining what is meant by 'children' when no further description is given." The age of fifteen was also used because it was considered to be the most realistic, as revealed by the commentary of the International Union of Child Welfare in the 1972 Report on the Work of the Conference of Government Experts, which included a note that in certain types of conflict where there is the unfortunate belief of the "military necessity of using children...it is important not to put the age limit on their use at an unreasonably high level lest we invite wholesale disregard for the provision.".
Mann (1987), 40.
Arts.14, 23, 24, 38, 50, 89.
Art.14, 50.
Art. 24.
Art. 132.
Pictet, as qtd in Mann (1987), 39.
Commentary of the International Union of Child Welfare, as qtd. in Mann (1987), 40.
Another possible aspect of tension is the argument that placing a minimum age of recruitment infringes on the right to freedom of association (for example with the army, armed groups or national liberation groups), particularly for those between the ages of 15 and 18 who have reached a certain degree of maturity and development. Nonetheless, as Van Beuran has pointed out, "the evolving standards in international human rights law...sets the standard of 18 as the minimum age for recruitment," giving the example of the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child, which is the most recently drafted child rights treaty.
Van Bueren, (1994) 816.
Ibid, 814-815.
Protocol I prohibits children under the age of 15 from direct participation in international armed conflict, yet this does not exclude indirect participation. There exists discrepancy and double standards between international and non-international armed conflicts with regards to type of participation and recruitment. Protocol II is only applicable to non-international armed conflicts that have reached the threshold, and many internal conflicts fall short of this. While the intention may have been not to become involved in the sovereign affairs of states, the practical effect of this is the insufficient protection for internal armed conflicts, which remains one of the major deficiencies. The CRC also retains the word 'direct' as does the Optional Protocol to the CRC.
Goodwin-Gill and Cohn (1994), 58.
The unclear definition with regards to recruitment, and in particular, regarding voluntary enlistment leaves the possibility for persons under the age of 18 to enter the armed forces and participate in hostilities. In addition, distinctions concerning voluntary recruitment are made when addressing a state 's armed forces and other kinds of armed groups (in the context of internal conflicts) in the Optional Protocol to the CRC. 1. The minimum age for recruitment and use of persons in armed conflict, whether this is an international or internal armed conflict should be 18 years. The law should be clear that this minimum age includes voluntary enlistment in addition to direct and indirect participation.
Instigating change in the rules of war is a difficult task, particularly when this requires change in the moral environment. Yet international law and international humanitarian law are always in a constant state of review. The adoption of the Additional Protocols and the inclusion of provisions relating to children participating in armed conflict, which were not in the Geneva Conventions, are just one example of changes in the legal, political and military environment. This process of review is inevitably a political one subject to a wide range of considerations. However, the very brutal nature of war makes it necessary for all involved to ensure that the widest range of protection is given to those under the age of 18 years, and to ensure that the parameters of the law are well-defined and unambiguous. Finally, in raising standards and legal rules, it is also important to expend energy in implementation.
