This study contributes to engineering as a set of primary data has been created, in an area that has previously received a very limited amount of attention, out of proportion with its importance. The JRC is a component in the calculation of shear strength of rock joints and due to this is involved in particular with stability. Clearly, this could have implications most importantly for safety, if the shear strength of a rock joint was overestimated but also in construction. The visual estimation of the JRC is the most common method for its determination due to how practical and easy it is, although little is known about it. Studies have shown that it is subjective, (Hsiung et al 1993), (Beer et al, 2002) but very few have tried to determine and find the extent to which factors affect this subjectivity. This project attempts to investigate if spatial awareness is important in the approach, and if so to what extent. The results show that for reliable estimations a good spatial ability is necessary although reasonable estimations can be made for simple profiles by those with limited spatial abilities. This project could be of use to others as some useful conclusions have been drawn which could in turn be the basis of further research, possibly investigating deeper the relationship between spatial abilities and sound estimations. Also, it was shown that there may be scope for two dimensional profiles to be sufficient to base an estimate for a three dimensional rock joint on in some of the simpler instances. This also could form the basis of further research and possibly change the way field measurements are carried out.
Although the results that were obtained were not what one would expect to achieve as examples of normal distributions were quite sporadic, some relevant conclusions that have been backed up by other elements of the results and the results of other studies have been achieved. The fact that the standard deviation of the results is similar to that of the equivalent grouping in the study that it was based on indicates a certain reliability in the results.
Weaknesses in the questionnaire may have lead to some unexpected results for the lowest group of artistic ability. If the test was simplified, more instances of normal distribution may have occurred. As it was participants may have not understood what they were being asked to do which would have affected their results. The inclusion of responses where the participant has rushed their answers is unavoidable but if more results were gathered this would hopefully become less significant. There is the possibility, if unlikely, that the method that was used to graph the two dimensional profiles from the rock samples was not accurate enough to fully portray the roughness, but this is only vaguely shown in the results and can quite easily be disproven.
The aim of this study was to determine whether spatial skills affect an individual 's estimation of the JRC and if so, to what extent. A task involving the visual comparison of four three dimensional rock samples and four two dimensional profiles to the standard set of profiles produced by Barton and Choubey (1977) was devised. This task was accompanied by a short questionnaire and taken by student participants around the University of campus in January 2006. A participant 's area of study, artistic ability and gender were all noted in the survey as previous studies have shown that these factors impinge upon an individual 's spatial awareness.
It was found that for simple profiles or ones that correspond closely with the standard set that spatial abilities were not overly important as a reasonable estimate could be made without them. However, those who were deemed to have higher spatial abilities were able to deal with profiles with anisotropic surface roughness where those with lesser spatial skills provided a more varied response. Even on profiles where reasonable estimations were obtained by groups with lower spatial abilities, those with higher spatial skills gave responses that were much more definite and with smaller variation. It was concluded although reasonable estimates were obtained by the population as a whole for the simpler profiles, for an accurate and reliable estimate, a good spatial awareness carries a high degree of importance.
The Joint Roughness Coefficient (JRC) is a number that is estimated by the visual comparison of a surface of a rock discontinuity to a set of standard profiles produced by Barton and Choubey (1977). (Appendix A). It is the most commonly-used method for the measurement of the roughness of rock joints in current use and is required for the calculation of shear strength of rock joints, using the Barton-Bandis criterion. (Beer, A.J. et al 2002).
Due to the nature of the method, where a three dimensional rock discontinuity has to be matched to a corresponding two dimensional profile, a mental rotation has to be performed. An individual 's ability to mentally rotate an object relies heavily on their spatial ability, which can differ from person to person, dependant on many factors including gender, age, education and experience (Chandler, D. 2005).
Previous studies have shown that typically, individuals that study physical science subjects such as engineering and mathematics perform better on spatial ability tests than those who, for example read for humanities degrees. Artists have also been shown to have excellent spatial skills compared to those of non-artists (Kozbelt, A. 2001), and males generally outperform females (Goldstein, Dal. 1990).
The aim of this study is to determine whether spatial skills affect an individual 's estimation of the JRC and if so, to what extent. It is hoped that this study will determine whether the assumptions detailed above, that it is believed that those with artistic tendencies, those who study physical sciences and males have superior spatial skills, with particular focus being placed upon artists, will hold true in the estimation of the JRC . Using these assumptions, a survey must be devised (Appendix B) where subjects are to compare both two dimensional and three dimensional profiles to the set of standard profiles with presupposed levels of spatial ability. The survey will be carried out upon a varied cross section of one hundred students studying at the University of , encompassing males and females across all subject areas with differing artistic abilities.
To determine whether spatial ability is important in the estimation of the JRC Number, a mental rotation test must be devised where levels of spatial ability can be identified amongst the sample of results. As the survey will be carried out on students around the University of campus, both the test and the means of establishing supposed levels of spatial ability must be fairly simple.
There have been numerous studies conducted into how individual differences affect spatial abilities, encompassing a vast subject area because of the scope for there to be many differences between individuals. Of particular relevance to this study, due to the ease at which answers can be obtained through a short questionnaire, is the affect that artistic abilities, area of study and gender can have on spatial abilities. Various studies have been carried out into these areas with some contrasting results. It is necessary to ascertain how the different groups of people mentioned above perform on the different types of mental rotation tasks used in these studies, and with this information, a test can be devised where justified presupposed levels of spatial ability can be employed.
Devon, R et al (1998), Ghiselli, E (1973) and Lajoie, S (2003) all found that good spatial abilities were inherent within the discipline of engineering. Devon, R et al conducted a study to establish whether an individual 's spatial ability improves after an engineering degree and whether this had any affect on retention within the discipline. They also investigated whether this training had any affects on spatial abilities with respect to gender. Two hundred and eighty-three engineering students, of which sixty-eight were female, took part in two types of mental rotations tests, the MRT Test based on a Vandenberg and Kruse (1978) type test and the more complex PSU MRT Test which was derived from the MRT Test. Both tests involved the student mentally rotating an image, drawn in three dimensions, and matching images that they deemed to be the same. Tests were conducted at the start of the first year and at the end of the fourth year and it was discovered that the student 's spatial abilities had improved. It was also found that through the engineering training the gender gap in spatial abilities had been reduced to negligible levels.
Ghiselli, E, carried out an investigation into the validity of aptitude tests in employment, summarising a huge body of systematic research in personnel testing dating from the 1920 's onwards. By means of a 'validity constant,' which is the correlation between test and criterion scores in the aptitude tests, the author showed that engineers have good spatial ability.
Lajoie, P, compared the spatial abilities of engineering and psychology students an orthographic projection task. The orthographic projection test involved the individual being asked to recognise and construct a three dimensional representation of an object from two dimensional representations. Of the thirty-three participants, the majority of which had graduate degrees and were deemed to be in the 'high ability' range, seventeen were engineers (fourteen male and three female), and sixteen were either psychology students or from a humanities department (six male and ten female). It was found that the engineers performed significantly higher than the non-engineers.
Through differing methodologies, all three of the studies show that engineers characteristically have high spatial abilities and the studies by Devon et al and Lajoie show male dominance in these abilities. The work carried out by Ghiselli is perhaps the most resounding in showing this because of the vast amounts of data that the author summarised. The spatial ability tests that were used on potential employees would have differed between employers, which shows that engineers have a tendency to outperform non engineers on a variety of tasks. The validity of the study is strengthened further as the data was collected over a period of around fifty years and no discriminations were made between age, sex, education or background. The fact that despite this a correlation can be seen between engineering and spatial ability quite conclusively shows it to be a reasonable assumption. The findings of the study by Lajoie could be slightly undermined as members of the engineering group were predominantly male and, to a lesser extent, the opposite being the case of the group of psychologists and humanities students. Therefore the higher spatial abilities seen within the group of engineers could be attributed to the majority being male. However, in the sample of the non engineers which was more balanced (six male and ten female), there was a significant difference between the results of the engineers and if the non engineer males were performing markedly better than the females in this group then it would be fair to expect the average of the group to be closer to that of the engineers. Consequently, it is fair to assume that although the males in this group could possibly have been performing better than the females, and this is unknown as the results were not analysed individually, they were not performing as well as those in the engineering group otherwise the difference between the groups would be less significant. This study therefore shows that the orthographic projection test is a valid method of distinguishing between the spatial abilities of engineers and non engineers.
The study conducted by Devon et al also quite conclusively shows that good spatial abilities are inherent within the disciple of engineering due to the way that they improve through engineering training, although it does not prove that engineers have better abilities than those in other subject areas, as that is not what the author set out to do. The fact that those who took part in the survey performed better on both types of test, the MRT and the more difficult PSU MRT after their degree course shows that engineers perform well even on difficult tasks. The results are obtained from a reasonably large sample consisting of around one quarter females, which is a big enough number to show a visible trend, which to some extend validates their findings on gender.
Haanstra, F (1996), Ascher, E (2000) and Kozbelt, A (2001) carried out studies into the significance of artistic abilities on the presence of spatial abilities, with differing findings. Haanstra set out to determine whether an art education had any effect on visual-spatial abilities. It was found, through a statistical method known as meta-analysis summarising the findings of many empirical studies conducted in this area, that an art education had no significant effect. The author also discovered that in terms of designing a course that would encourage spatial abilities to be developed, a combination of studio art and the study of art work would be most fruitful. The meta-analysis used was based upon thirty studies concerned with visual-spatial ability, published between 1960 and 1990.
Ascher 's study was to compare visual-spatial abilities in male and female artists and non artists. The author found that artists were not more skilled in visual-spatial tasks and that there was not a smaller gender difference in mental rotation ability amongst artists. However, it was also discovered that males made fewer errors than female, which replicates previous studies, showing a male dominance. The tasks were carried out by a total of forty participants, twenty (ten male and ten female) recruited from the art departments of two undergraduate universities with similar admissions standards, and considered artists. The remaining twenty, consisting ten male and ten female, made up the non artists group and were all undergraduates that did not study art or consider themselves artists. Participants took mental rotation tasks which involved matching three dimensional shapes on a computer screen.
Kozbelt found that artists outperformed non artists on a series of four perception tasks, which included a mental rotation task. It was also found that males outperformed females on all but there was less of a gender gap amongst the artists. The study used forty six volunteers, of which thirty were art students, seventeen in their first year of study (five male and twelve female) and thirteen in their fourth year of study (four male and nine female). The remaining sixteen were classed as novices (eleven males and five females) and followed other degree courses. The mental rotation task involved the participant deciding whether twenty four pairs of block figures drawn in perspective as to look three dimensional could be rotated to match.
At first it seems difficult to reach any useful conclusions as to whether artists as a group have better spatial abilities than non artists, due to the varying nature of the findings from these studies. It seems logical to expect the findings of Haanstra 's meta-analysis to be most conclusive as it summarises the work of a number of studies in the area and as was with the case with Ghiselli 's study on aptitude testing. However Ghiselli applied a validity constant to his work whereas meta-analysis is a fairly new technique and remains unproven in the field of art research (Diket, 1994). In addition to this, Ghiselli had access to a much lager body of work and the study by Haanstra only used thirty previous studies so it is much less far reaching and therefore cannot be regarded equally reliable. It is also important to note the criteria used for the selecting of studies to be analysed. For example, studies were included which took those who studied art history to be artists which is not necessarily true as it does not include practical elements in the course. A wide age range of 4-65 was allowed which may have also lead to inaccuracies in the findings as it is debatable the extent to which a four year old can have an art training. There is no discrimination between the methodologies used in the studies that were used in the meta-analysis and this could lead to the inclusion of poor studies and outdated testing. This would not be so crucial if there was more of a wealth of material for the meta-analysis as there was for Ghiselli, but as there was only thirty studies included, poorly carried out tests would have more influence in the overall findings. As none of the studies used in the meta-analysis have been specifically mentioned, it is impossible to tell what the tests that were used actually were. Therefore, as well as being potentially outdated and using equipment in need of refinement, the tests (as is the case in many visual-spatial tasks), could have been strongly loaded to respond to a fluid intelligence factor, which is not affected by schooling and therefore it would be impossible to tell from these results whether an art education improves spatial abilities (Cronbach, 1990).
The findings of Ascher are to some extent validated by the fact that males were found to have fewer errors than females, which ties with other studies carried out in the field of gender and accuracy and this also shows the test used to be an adequate measure of spatial abilities. However, there was no difference found in the reaction times between males and females, where in previous studies males have shown themselves to provide faster responses. This can be explained by females having faster reaction times in perceptual tasks of lower level difficulty (Voyer and Bryden, 1990). This therefore indicates that the mental rotation tasks used in the study were of low level difficulty. This could explain why artistic ability had no effect on performance, because the images were too simple to prevent a challenge to groups that might be expected to show lower levels of mental rotation abilities.
The study carried out by Kozbelt seems to be fairly reliable, primarily because of the results obtained despite the grouping. In the artist group there were significantly more females than males and although in keeping with other studies where males outperform females, which was the case within both artist and non artist groups, the artist group outperformed the non artist group. This performance therefore can only really be assigned to artists having superior spatial ability than non artists as it is not possible for gender differences to be responsible as there are more females in the artist group. The tests are also validated because within the groups males perform better than females, which show them to be an adequate measure of spatial ability.
Based on the findings of the studies detailed above it seems reasonable to conclude that engineers and artists have high spatial abilities, which is particularly noticeable in mental rotation tasks. Males generally outperform females but there is less of a gender gap between groups of artists and engineers.
Barton and Choubey developed in 1977 what is now the most commonly used technique of estimating the JRC number of a rock surface. They defined a set of ten standard roughness profiles with a range of 0-20, to which a rock surface is visually compared and the JRC number obtained as the closest match. This number is then applied to an equation in conjunction with values for the joint wall compressive strength (JCS) and the residual friction angle () to obtain a value for the shear strength of a rock joint. However as Hsiung et al (1993) point out in their study into alternative methods of determining the JRC number, the process is highly subjective and may introduce large estimation errors for the shear strength of rock joints, especially when the normal stress is low. Through this study it was concluded that of the alternative methods that were tested; the tilt test, average deviation approach and using the theory of fractal geometry, none were capable of providing a reasonable JRC value which shows that the visual estimation method will continue to be valid and remain in standard use through the lack of suitable alternatives. They also found that underestimations (compared to laboratory testing) of the JRC number may prove to provide a conservative shear strength value which would be suitable in mechanical analysis and the design of underground excavations but such an underestimation may hold problems from the standpoint of fluid and gas flow through fractures for long-term repository performance, hence highlighting the importance of obtaining a realistic JRC number. Zhao (1997) agrees that the method has tendencies to be slightly misleading although claims that as the approach was developed and based on artificial and weak rocks, when it is applied to natural joints the process over predicts the shear strength which could clearly create difficulties during construction. In this study, little importance is placed on whether under or overestimations are more common with the visual approach as that goes beyond the scope of this work, but it does go to reiterate the significance of obtaining a rational JRC number.
Due to this, it is necessary that factors that affect the way that the JRC number is estimated be understood, however, there has been little work done in this area.
Beer et al (2002) carried out an internet based survey study into the effects that experience in the area of geotechnical engineering has on the visual estimation of the JRC. Sample profiles were produced and then circulated on a geotechnical mailing list for comparison to the standard set of profiles and at least 122 estimations were made on each of the three profiles. The distribution pattern for the estimations was established quickly, with the mean changing very little after around fifty estimations, which shows that a sufficient number of results were accumulated, which adds reliability to the study. It was found that as levels of experience increased the standard deviation of the JRC estimated decreased indicating that as experience level increases a more accurate estimate of the JRC number is obtained. This again highlights the subjectivity which is inherent in the approach. It was also shown that under favourable circumstances, such as the observed joint profile being similar to one of the standard profiles, a more precise estimate was produced with very limited distribution even for those who had little or no experience. This would indicate that it is suitable for people with low levels of experience to estimate the easier rock joints but on more problematic profiles such as ones that differ quite substantially from the standard set of profiles higher levels of experience are required. This is shown by a large distribution on one of their profiles, deemed to be more problematic, which on inspection was bi-modal with a large difference between the means of the two populations which would clearly cause discrepancies as to the correct value of the JRC number.
The literature available seems to show that the visual estimation of the JRC number is the easiest and most practical means of determining a value for the shear strength of natural rock joints. However, it has also been shown how subjective the process is and it is important that reliable values can be obtained so that construction can be carried out safely and successfully. Work needs to be carried out to establish what factors are important in its estimation so that they can be used to increase the accuracy and dependability of the procedure.
The test was designed so that those with high spatial abilities would be able to perform well so that it would be possible to determine the importance of spatial abilities upon the procedure of visual estimation of the JRC number. As the test was only to be taken by 100 people it was necessary for there to be a large enough sample with high presupposed spatial abilities within this population to obtain meaningful results. Therefore, the test needed to harness the spatial abilities of those studying engineering, those with artistic abilities and males so had to be designed so that all of these groups would perform well. The majority of the participants in the survey who indicated that they had artistic abilities would most likely have been educated in the UK studying Art G.C.S.E and A-Level. These syllabuses include a mixture of studio art and the study of art which according to Haanstra (1996) is the best combination for the acquisition of good spatial skills. The engineering group was later broadened to all physical science subjects, including mathematics and physics due to the similar nature of the courses. It was noted from the literature that engineers and males generally seemed to perform well on all types of spatial ability test but the performance of artists was not as convincing on every test. It seemed that all groups would perform well on an orthographic projection style test and on a mental rotation test that involved rotating objects drawn in three dimensions as Kozbelt 's study.
It was decided that there would be two elements to the test; a comparison of four three dimensional samples to the set of standard profiles, as produced by Barton and Choubey and a comparison of four two dimensional profiles to the standard set. The two dimensional profiles were based upon the three dimensional ones and were created in the laboratory using a Micro Four Unit which plotted the co-ordinates of the rock sample in an x-y frame. The first part of the test, the two dimensional comparison, is the same principal that was applied effectively by Beer et al (2002) and is a form of simple mental rotation test. The three dimensional comparison is similar to the orthographic projection test and is more difficult than the first element of the test so the difference between the responses of those with high spatial abilities and those with lower abilities should be more noticeable. As the two dimensional profiles were based upon the three dimensional samples it was thought that those with high spatial abilities would get similar estimates for the JRC for corresponding profiles. The rock samples were randomly labelled with a letter so that it was unknown which profiles corresponded to which sample. The profiles are shown below.
Profiles 1-4 above show a reasonable amount of variation and particularly profile 2 but also 3 could be deemed as a 'problematic' profiles as in places the roughness and slope vary quite considerably.
As the two dimensional profiles were produced directly off the samples it was not necessary to consider scale and a direct comparison could be made with the standard set of profiles.
As the survey was to be conducted on participants around the University of campus it was necessary for it to be fairly simple and quick to complete. Due to this the questionnaire was very brief and the participant only had to indicate what level they thought that their artistic ability was on a scale of one to five so that it would n't be overly laborious. A copy of the full survey is shown in Appendix B.
Profiles 1 and 4 show a normal distribution around JRC numbers 6-8 and 10-12 respectively. Profile 3 seems as though it could be bi-modal where participant 's responses were centred around either 12-14 or 18-20. Profile 2 shows that the majority of participants thought that the JRC number was either 2-4 or 4-6 but this does not follow a normal distribution and there are a significant number of outliers.
Sample A seems to be bi-modal with distributions centred around 6-8 and 10-12. Sample B follows a clear normal distribution around 6-8. Sample C follows quite a random distribution, with two vague normal distributions centred around 4-6 and 10-12. The vast majority of participants thought that sample D was JRC number 18-20 although there is a small outcrop centred around 12-14.
As the level of artistic ability rose, and with this spatial abilities, profile 1 developed from being very varied from around 2-4 to 10-12 to be increasingly centred around 6-8 to the extent that on the highest level 4/5, almost all responses showed this. Again with profile 2, the responses seemed to become clearer, with less of a range as the artistic ability level rose, although even at the highest level there are discrepancies between JRC numbers 2-4 and 4-6. For profile 3, the distribution shifts from being centred vaguely more around 12-14 to being around 18-20 as spatial abilities increase, although this is by no means exclusively the case. Profile 4 follows a normal distribution independent of artistic abilities, centred about 8-10 and 10-12.
Sample A has a varied distribution that shifts from being vaguely centred on JRC number 6-8 to being centred around 10-12 as spatial abilities increase. This JRC of 10-12 corresponds with the values of its two dimensional match, profile 4, as shown in fig. 5. Sample B follows a normal distribution independent of spatial abilities although JRC 6-8 becomes much more prominent as they increase. This is similar to its matching profile (1), where higher spatial abilities respond by singling out the 6-8 profile much more resoundingly. Sample C is very varied throughout with no clear distribution except for on the highest artistic ability level where 4-6 is the most common response, which corresponds to some extent with the responses for profile 2. Sample D is largely centred around JRC 18-20 although at lower levels of artistic ability responses of 12-14 are more common, but this decreases in frequency as the level rises to where at the level 4/5 almost all answers point to 18-20.
There is no general trend shown as to whether the mean increases or decreases with spatial abilities as it can be seen that as the artistic level rises some means increase and some decrease. However where there is an increase or decrease it seems to be a smooth progression, generally gradually occurring as the level rises.
The standard deviation, as might be expected, seems to decrease as the artistic ability level rises, indicating a general decrease in the variation in responses. However, the standard deviation of artistic level 1 for some profiles is at a similar level to that of level 4/5.
The majority of responses indicate that profile 1 corresponds with the standard profile for 6-8 has a similar distribution type to that of the artistic level 4/5 group where 6-8 is by far the most popular answer. Profile 2 again to some extent mirrors the responses of the higher level artists, where 2-4 and 4-6 are the clear choices, although there is a very slight normal distribution around 10-12. For profile 3, the responses are almost equally shared between 12-14, 16-18 and 18-20. Profile 4 shows a strong normal distribution based around 10-12, which is again similar to the higher to the normal distribution shown in the artistic level 4/5 but also in level 1.
Sample A shows two poorly defined normal distributions around 6-8 and 10-12. This ties in loosely with the clear normal distribution highlighting 10-12 for the corresponding profile, profile 4. This distribution is not as clear as that shown by the higher level artists for this sample. Samples B and C are again comparable to that of the artistic level 4/5 as 6-8 and 4-6 respectively are quite clearly also the source for the majority of responses although not as definitely. Sample D shows 18-20 to be by far the most popular choice although, as was inherent in the lower levels of artistic ability , there is a small amount of responses giving 12-14.
Profiles 1 and 2 are similar to the responses given by those studying physical sciences in that the most popular answers are common to both, although there is a larger distribution in the responses of the non-physical scientists. Profile 3 is similar to the responses of the lower level artistic rating groups, where JRC 12-14 is the most common answer. Profile 4 shows an untidy distribution although still highlighting JRC 8-10 and 10-12 which has been the case regardless of spatial ability.
Similarly to the responses of the physical science students for sample A, the majority of the responses are split between 6-8 and 10-12, carrying a wide distribution. Sample B shows 6-8 to be the most popular answer although there are more outliers than in the physical science group. Sample C has a much greater distribution than the physical science results and points to 10-12 instead of 4-6 as the JRC number.
There is no significant difference between the means of the samples and profiles with respect to subject grouping.
From fig.5 it can be seen that irrespective of spatial ability, profiles 1 and 4 have been well matched to the standard profiles, with both having normal distributions. This could be due to the fact that the profiles had an isotropic surface roughness and were quite easy to compare to the standard set of profiles as they were similar in appearance, which coincides with the findings of Beer et al (2002). Therefore, for samples such as this, comparing a two dimensional profile to the standard set of profiles could suffice. This point is further consolidated when considering the closeness of the results between the corresponding two and three dimensional profiles. The responses for samples A and B give the same JRC number as profiles 4 and 1 respectively, with both samples also showing a normal distribution. This goes some way to suggest that for simple, smooth rock joints such as these, spatial ability is not important which falls in line with the theory that simple mental rotation tasks do not present a challenge for those with high spatial abilities and those with lower spatial abilities can perform to an equal level. (Ascher, 2000). This also indicates that, as all of the participants in this study were assumed to have no prior experience of visual estimation of the JRC, it is not particularly necessary to have experience to make a reasonable estimate, but again this can only be considered the case for simple rock joints, which again fits with the findings of with Beer et al (2002).
The bi-modal nature of profile 3 in fig.5 could possibly be assigned to the nature of the standard set of profiles, as the 12-14 and 18-20, to which the population was split between, look similar as both have comparable roughness but the former has more of a stepped appearance and the latter undulating. There are quite striking differences when considering the break down of which groups of participants chose either 12-14 or 18-20. From figs.7,9,11 and 13 a shift can be seen from the distribution being centred around 12-14 to being centred around 18-20 as artistic rating level and assumed spatial ability increases. It is difficult to find an explanation for this other than the 18-20 bracket is closer to the true JRC number for the profile and those with higher levels of spatial ability were able to recognise this. When making the comparison between this profile and the sample (D) that it was based on, there are some noteworthy differences. Nearly all participants estimated the sample to have a JRC number of 18-20 with only a small percentage responding with 12-14 unlike with its corresponding profile. This could be due to the sample being more easily recognisable as the 18-20 bracket than the profile, which would indicate further that this was the correct answer and that it was due to their higher spatial abilities that those in the higher level artistic ability group recognised the two dimensional profile as 18-20. This, however, indicates that spatial abilities were not important when mentally rotating the three dimensional sample, which could simply be because it looked similar to the 18-20 profile on the standard set. This therefore points to the idea that as long as the profile to be estimated looks similar to one of the standard set, then spatial abilities are not required, as was shown with profiles 1 and 4. The mudstone profile (2), is one such profile that could be deemed as anisotropic and not resembling any particular profile on the standard set. Varied responses can be seen on fig.5 where participants would have been able to interpret the profile differently depending on what section they based their decision on. This variation in response could also have been caused by the highly un-planar nature of the profile leading participants to make their judgement in terms of slope of the line as opposed to its roughness, which would indicate a lack of understanding. When comparing this to the three dimensional sample, it can be seen that the general trend is for participants to deem the sample rougher than the profile. This could possibly be assigned to failings in the method of graphing the two dimensional profile. The nature of the sample of mudstone, with its downwardly diagonal layers, may not have been well suited to the graphing method, as a vertical point was taken on the surface of the rock and as the roughest areas at the ends of the layers would have been facing away from the point, meaning that the point could only have skimmed over the surface, not really penetrating the areas of roughness making the profile appear smoother than the sample. This is the only sample that this could possibly have occurred with due to its layered nature and is one possible explanation for the erratic nature of the results. However, the results shown by those in the artistic ability level 4/5 group show that it may simply be that the profile was too complex for those with lower levels of spatial ability than themselves to rotate as this group produced some quite definite results. Figs. 13 and 14 show the majority of participants opting for JRC numbers 2-4 or 4-6, almost exclusively on the two dimensional profile and convincingly on the three dimensional sample, although there are a few outliers which extend up to the higher brackets on the scale. This is mirrored, but not as extensively, by the results shown by those studying physical sciences which again emphasises the argument that it may just be spatial abilities that allow a reasonable estimate on more difficult profiles. It is then necessary to consider the performance of the groups with assumed higher levels of spatial ability on the profiles and samples that have yielded useful estimations irrespective of spatial ability to determine whether they outperform those with lower abilities on these profiles too. From figs.7-14, there is quite a noticeable difference in responses as the artistic ability rises. It seems that, particularly with profiles 1 and 4, that those with the higher spatial ability could easily distinguish which profile to match it with from the standard set as the distribution decreases until the highest level almost all response fit into two adjacent brackets. This shows that although reasonable estimations can be obtained on easier profiles such as 1 and 4, those with higher mental rotation abilities will be able to obtain more reliable, clearer results. The improved matching with the corresponding sample that occurs at higher levels of spatial ability goes to emphasise this point further, as does the behaviour of the mean JRC estimate given in fig.15. Although there is no general trend in the mean values as the artistic ability level increases, with some mean values increasing and some decreasing, it changes gradually without any abrupt behaviour. This could indicate that the mean values are changing towards their true JRC value, which would probably be best represented by the responses of the artistic ability 4/5 group because for the majority this group was in general agreement with very few outliers.
The standard deviation, shown in fig.16, reduces constantly, as might be expected, form groups 2 through to 4/5. This shows that there is less variance in the responses of those with higher level spatial abilities, which can be seen by consulting the individual graphs. However, somewhat unexpectedly, the standard deviation for those in group 1 is comparable to group 4/5, which is shown by the similarities between the groups of the profiles 1 and 4. Although these could be considered the easiest profiles to estimate, one would still expect the other groups to perform on a similar level. This could possible be due to a false modesty as to their artistic abilities on the part of the members of group 1, reading the scale wrong and believing that one and not five represented the highest of abilities or they were not able to quantify their ability into a number without some scale of reference, such as a qualification, to base it on. Aside from this, the range of the standard deviation (1.5 - 4.2) is comparable to that obtained in the study conducted by Beer et al (2002) on the effects of experience on the visual estimation of the JRC. For the category that was used that is relevant to this study, no experience of JRC estimation, a standard deviation ranging 2.6 - 4.7 was calculated, which is by no means validation for this study but does indicate an element of reliability in the results.
The ideas that are prompted by the performance of the different levels of artistic ability are to some extent consolidated, as could be expected, by the performance of physical science students. The responses of those following degree courses in physical sciences seems to mirror the responses of the higher level artistic ability group but not as definitely. This could mean that the artist group 4/5 is a more talented group in terms of spatial awareness as the physical scientist group is much larger and over a larger group it is much more likely to include exceptions to the rule which would have low spatial abilities. There would also be females, who it can be seen submitted a more varied response than males (figs. 22-25), included in the physical science group and although within groups such as this there is less of a gender gap, one is still present which would affect the results.
Due to the lack of many normal distributions in the results, with some distributions being bi-modal or having seemingly random distributions, it has not been possible to read an average JRC value from the graphs as would be expected. This could be due to problems with the execution of the survey such as; a lack of interest that may prompt people to rush the estimations without really considering them, a lack of understanding which could lead to participants mistaking the task as a measure of the slope of the line instead of its roughness. Also, as mentioned before, the estimates of artistic ability may have helped generate some unexpected results. If the study was to be repeated, it might be useful to have qualifications in art, such as G.C.S.E or A-Level, as some kind of base for a participant 's decision. It may also be beneficial on any repeat test to use a more detailed method of graphing the two dimensional profiles so that the roughness is represented perfectly. Using a larger sample of participants and possibly using volunteers from an art teaching establishment may produce more conclusive results as participants with very high levels of artistic ability could be rare around the University of campus as the university does not teach art so it is likely the highest art qualification by any participants on this survey is Art to A-Level.
Based on the findings of this study, it is reasonable to say that spatial abilities are fairly important in the estimation of the JRC. Rational and even useful estimates can be achieved without the presence of a good spatial awareness on simple profiles that are planar or closely resemble profiles on the standard set. The close match that was found, irrespective of spatial ability, between the corresponding profiles and samples on the more isotropic rock sample, sandstone and limestone, show that for these simpler rock joints it may suffice to merely use a two dimensional profile of a rock joint to make an estimate. However, participants with high spatial abilities demonstrated a much less varied response which can only be assumed to be more reliable, which was the case for all profiles and samples.
It is fair to say that at least to some extent, the specifications of this project were met. A task to test an individual 's estimation of the JRC was designed, a survey was successfully carried out and results were obtained that some conclusions could be drawn from. The results were not what would have been expected as no mean JRC levels could really be extracted due to the widespread lack of normal distributions, however, when each group was carefully analysed individually and in depth it could be seen that spatial abilities are important for the accurate, reliable estimation of the JRC.
The overall costing of this project was   4760, the breakdown of which is tabulated at the end of this section. The benefits of this study would include the creation and analysis of primary data, in an area of research that has not received a great deal of attention. The JRC is a component in the calculation of shear strength of rock joints and due to this is involved in particular with stability. Clearly, this could have implications most importantly for safety, if the shear strength of a rock joint was overestimated but also in construction. The JRC has been shown to be subjective in previous studies, but few have dealt with the issues of what factors make it so subjective. This project investigates the importance of spatial awareness in the estimation process and produces results and conclusions that could be used by others to extend the body of research in this area. The results show that for reliable estimations a good spatial ability is necessary although reasonable estimations can be made for simple profiles by those with limited spatial abilities. This project could be of use to others as some useful conclusions have been drawn which could in turn be the basis of further research, possibly investigating deeper the relationship between spatial abilities and sound estimations. Also, it was shown that there may be scope for two dimensional profiles to be sufficient to base an estimate for a three dimensional rock joint on in some of the simpler instances. This also could form the basis of further research and possibly change the way field measurements are carried out.
