A suitable structural section is required for a roof member that is to be pre-fabricated and used in an interior space that will be divided by glass curtain walls and the roof to be a pedestrian area. Due to the poor deflection tolerance of glass, the primary design consideration for the roof member is that it should have minimal deflection. Once the primary design specifications are limited, a performance index, M 1, is used to make a suitable selection for the roof member. A Glulam Softwood rectangular section (720x90x32.53) provides the most appropriate section for the member to be designed to under the M 1 performance index. Further characteristics can be taken into consideration to ensure that the most suitable section is chosen, these include; price, visual impact and availability. The performance index M 1 can be modified to create the performance index M 2. This index avoids the problems associated with M 1 as the use of weighting factors allows the designer to make one property more dominant if necessary. M 2 provides an improved performance index for which to make an appropriate structural section from.
In this instance the CES selector will be used to choose an optimum structural section from the considerable variety available within the database. The selection is chosen by producing a combination of the optimal selection parameters using the 'advanced' functions available within the programme.
A suitable structural section is required for a roof member that is to be pre-fabricated and used in an interior space that will be divided by glass curtain walls and the roof to be a pedestrian area. Due to the poor deflection tolerance of glass, the primary design consideration for the roof member is that it should have minimal deflection. The following specification for the member will need to be met:
Performance indices use several factors to determine which section would be most appropriate for the particular application. In this case the specification states that torsional rigidity and recycle fraction to be maximised and energy content to be minimised, the performance index M 1 (Equation 1) can be used to select a suitable section for the beam. Equation 1.
The most appropriate section will have the maximum value of M 1, and a value as close to 1 as possible.
From the specification the maximum deflection of the roof member can be calculated:
The applied load in N/m is calculated from the equivalent factored live roof load of 100 Kg/m.
The maximum deflection of the beam, , can also be give by Equation 2 where q is the load applied in N/m, L is the length of the beam in meters and EI is the flexural stiffness of the beam. The resistance of the beam to lateral bending depends upon the flexural stiffness of the beam. Equation 2.
A suitable structural section for the beam to be constructed from is identified by setting the structural sections selection within the CES program to the following parameters:
The maximum capacity of the lifting gear that is available for use on site is 400kg, it is therefore necessary for the weight of the beam to be less than 400kg. A limit state is created within the CES programme to ensure that all sections selected will have a mass per unit length that is appropriate for the application:
To further limit the possible sections a graphical Ashby diagram of deflection against M 1 (Appendix 1) is used. The flexural stiffness is used as a variable and the deflection criteria () is applied along with the lifting gear limitations. The following list of sections passes the selection criteria:
The Ashby diagram in Appendix 1 shows that the Glulam Softwood rectangular section (720x90x32.53) has the highest M 1 value out of the short-listed 13 sections. Using the performance index M 1 this would be the most appropriate section for the application of use as a pre-fabricated structural roof member. The diagram in Appendix 2 shows the schematic of the Glulam Softwood rectangular section (720x90x32.53). One of the architects' requirements was that the beam should be partially exposed; the Glulam section would able to be partially exposed and add to the aesthetic appearance of the building. Glulam is softwood which might me more aesthetically pleasing within the architects' design rather than the Steel beams.
The sections manufactured from Hot Rolled Steel and the Pultruded GFRF Vinyl Ester are I beam sections, whereas the Glulam section has a rectangular section.
There could be other structural sections that are not included in the database that could be suitable for use as this structural roof member. There is continuing development of types of materials which inevitably means that new suitable structural sections could be developed from these materials. These sections would not be included in the current Cambridge Engineering Selector so would not be able to be considered.
All thirteen of the materials on the previous page meet the original specification for the possible structural sections that the pre-fabricated roof member could be designed to. There are though further characteristics that can be taken into consideration to ensure that the most suitable section is chosen:
The price of the section is also an important factor to consider. The price needs to be appropriate for the design and in this case the beam will be a one-off, the price is therefore not as an important as if in the manufacture of mass produced items for retail. The Pultruded GFRF Vinyl Ester I-section has a price of 3.33 - 3.68, the Hot Rolled Steel Sections 0.38 - 0.42 and the Glulam Softwood rectangular section has a price of 1.31 - 1.44. The Glulam section has a high price (but still a lot less than the GFRF) but if it meets the all the other criteria it still may be an appropriate choice for the structural section.
The section that is chosen needs to be readily available at the time of construction, or be able to be pre-ordered in advance. If an unusual section is used it may delay the construction and at to the cost of the project. If the section is not available easily it is likely that the price of the section will also be higher.
Within the architects' design the visual impact of the member of the environment is an important criterion. In modern society environmental impact of a new development is extremely important, in order to get planning permission the selection of the structural member maybe a central factor. The Glulam section will have less impact on the environment as it is made from a natural material rather than the made-made steel.
As the section will be used within a building it is important that the flammability is low. This is not a highly important factor when considering which section to select but it is vital that it is considered. The steel will be less flammable than the Glulam section, but the Glulam can be treated to make it flame retardant.
The material that the beam in manufactured from will need to be corrosion resistance. There will be environmental attack from the atmosphere and other pollutants, so to ensure a long service life; the beam will be required to have a high resistance to corrosion. The Glulam section would need to be resistant to rotting or degrading in the atmosphere and the Hot-Rolled Steel sections would also need to be corrosion resistant. This selection criterion is important as corrosion/rusting could cause failures within the beam and lead to injuries being caused. Glulam has a higher safety factor (1.06-1.16) than the hot rolled steel (1-1.05).
If these other criteria are used along with the original specification and performance index M 1, Glulam Softwood rectangular section (720x90x32.53) would still be the most appropriate section for the use as a pre-fabricated structural roof member. Even though the Glulam is more expensive than the hot-rolled steel sections, the other advantages, for example, high torsional stiffness and low deflection means that it is most suitable for use in this application.
The performance index, M 2, (Equation 3) is another quantitative criterion from which a suitable structural section could be selected. M 2 is a fraction of 1, so the ideal section would have a value of 1. In this case the closer to 1 the performance index is better the structural section is compared to the specification of the section. Equation 3.
With.
Where , are weighting factors and are the maximum values for the properties.
The performance index M 1 provides a basic method of quantifying the selection criteria, but it is biased against recycle fraction as recycle fraction is only a value between 0 and 1. M 1 also assumes that the three properties are all of equal importance. The problems associated with M 1 are overcome by the use of weighting factors in M 2 and dividing each property by its maximum value. The weighting factors allow one of the properties, either recycle fraction, energy content or torsional stiffness to be made more dominant if the designer decides that this property of the section should take priority over another.
If a greater importance is placed on the recycle fraction i.e. is made larger than . and , the Hot Rolled Steel sections may provide a more suitable selection for the beam. The Glulam Softwood rectangular section (720x90x32.53) has a recycle fraction of 0.3 - 0.4 whereas the sections manufactured from Hot Rolled Steel have a recycle fraction of 0.9 - 0.95. This means that if the highest recycle fraction possible is the most important property then it maybe appropriate to select the hot-rolled steel over the Glulam section.
Even though Glulam has a lower recycle fraction than Hot-Rolled Steel, if the wood that the Glulam is manufactured from is obtained from a sustainable source, it makes the Glulam more environmentally friendly, whereas hot-rolled steel is manufactured from a non-renewable source.
The structural selection chosen if the performance index M 2 is used will depend on the weighting factors chosen in the equation. The same 13 sections will always be the structural sections to be selected from as these are the only sections that meet the original selection criteria for defection and the applied load.
According to the first performance index, M 1, the Glulam section is the structural section of choice. Out of the 13 sections that pass the selection criteria of deflection and load per unit length the Glulam section has the highest M 1. M 2 provides an improved performance index for which to make an appropriate structural section from.
The Glulam Softwood rectangular section with designation 720x90x32.53mm is the recommended structural section for the pre-fabricated roof member to be constructed from.
