The experience of democratization is a process that varies according to the country in question. In development literature, some see democracy as a means to an end and some as an inevitable consequence. Also opposing views exist and it has been argued that to achieve drastic growth a country benefits most from an authoritative regime like in Stalin 's Russia or China. The article by Acemoglu and Robinson, Democratization or Repression? (July 1999, MIT working paper) proposes a theoretical model on the likelihood of elite to become repressive and under what conditions a revolution of the masses is likely. The structure of this review is to shortly explain the intuition behind Acemoglu and Robinson 's model, and to summarise the main conclusions. Then, the implications of the results and their empirical applicability will be commented on. It will be shown that even though the theoretical model is well arranged and clearly set out, the restrictive assumptions behind it act as a major factor undermining the ability of the model to explain historical democratization experiences and to predict the outcomes of current ones.
The model presented in the article is a game of incomplete information between three agents: the rich, the middle class and the poor. The rich is the elite in power and it can be either tough, flexible or weak. The type of the elite is not observable to the public. The situation is social unrest caused by the disenfranchised poor where there exists a threat of a possible revolution. The elite have alternatives to institute a full scale democracy, to offer a limited franchise for the middle class or to repress the threat. The poor decide whether or not to attempt a revolution, which is costly, but if succeeds, will have them better off. Each of the three types of the elite generates a different median voter (poor, middle class or none) and therefore a different desired level of taxation and hence, redistribution.
The game is solved for a Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium. In a game of complete information the solution has the three different types of elite choosing three different strategies and the poor never attempt a revolution. In contrast, the incomplete information case has two equilibria: a mixed strategy one where the elite play their strategies with different probabilities and a pure strategy equilibrium. It is a dominant strategy for the tough type to repress but the weak type never will. In the mixed strategy equilibrium the weak type pretends some of the time to be the flexible type, choosing limited enfranchisement. In the second equilibrium the flexible type does not choose the limited option, reason being that the poor interpret a concession as a sign of weakness. Also revolutions are made possible through incomplete information. Another interesting observation is that higher inequality in income increases the level of tax preferred by the poor and therefore makes democracy more costly. It follows from the model that this economy will more likely suffer repression and the probability of a revolution attempt is higher. Also an increase in the tax level preferred by the middle class has a similar effect.
The emergence of democratic institutions in the western countries during the 19 th or early 20 th centuries, followed by an extension of the franchise, has been credited to different factors. The reasons for elites to extend the franchise include the enlightenment (philosophical), political party competition or middle class drive (internal conflict), or a threat of revolution (external conflict). When the model in the paper is compared with these, it seems mostly applicable with the idea of an external conflict. However, the elite will not extend the franchise unless there is a threat, and according to Acemoglu and Robinson there is a threat of a revolution only when limited concessions are made, acting as a sign of weakness and when the cost of revolution is below the achievable benefits.
At first glance the model presented in the paper is very intuitive and seems to generate many interesting applications. However, when we start thinking of these applications, it becomes clear that the experience of democratization does not fit into one single pattern but has emerged in many countries under very difficult circumstances, for example the proclaimed increase in redistribution was not observed in the UK. It is also not evident how this model could be used in helping the developing countries today to achieve a more stable political environment.
Lindert, P.(1989) "Modern Fiscal Redistribution: A Preliminary essay" University of California at Davis, Agricultural History Center, Working Paper no.55, Graph quoted in Acemoglu, D, S. Johnson and J. Robinson (2000) "Why did the West Extend the Franchise? Democracy, Inequality and Growth in Historical Perspective", Quarterly Journal of Economics CXV, 1167-1199.
With regards to development today, a widespread problem hindering and sometimes even reversing developmental efforts in the third world is a corrupt government. This is usually consistent of small elite who use repression to control and collect resources for their own use. We can assume that the type of the elite is not known, if it was, there would never be attempts for a revolution. Although these attempts are not that common in the developing world, maybe due to lack of political organisation because of the free-rider problem, they are known to happen. Therefore the game has incomplete information. In terms of this model, the fact that the elite choose to repress means that it is the tough type. This is chosen when the cost of redistributing to the poor is less than the cost of repression for the flexible government. A tough type will always choose to repress and if the cost of redistribution is more than the cost of repression, so will the flexible type. Following a concession, the poor would attempt a revolution. Therefore no concessions will ever be made. This is because the demands of redistribution in a democracy would be very high and lower concessions only lead to revolution, leading to this cyclical equilibrium where the poor are repressed and there will not be any franchise. Interestingly, inequality acts to reinforce this mechanism: "repression is more likely to be used when inequality is higher because the cost of democracy to the rich is greater in a more equal society".
Acemoglu and Robinson (1999) "Democratization or Repression?" (July 1999, MIT working paper) p.2.
The model has its limitations that follow from the assumptions imposed. The only available fiscal instrument is a linear income tax rate, same for all agents and tax revenues are redistributed lump-sum. These are the requirements for non-distortionary taxation in public economics but rarely correspond to the real world. Instead, proportional and value added taxation is used to create disincentives but it acts as a distortion to the efficient market mechanism. Next, pay-offs to the middle class are omitted; they are not expected to participate in the revolutionary threat. Especially when compared to the European evidence of democratization, this assumption limits the applicability of the model because no internal conflict is modelled. Also that they are not part of the revolutionary threat can be contested in some cases. Finally, redistribution in a full democracy is assumed greater than the payoff to the poor from a successful revolution. This is not necessarily the case as a successful revolution would generate new elite chosen by the poor and they would control the factors of production.
To conclude, the emergence of institutions in the developed world has been the subject of great study because of the need to find something that would create political stability in the developing world and allow for a more development-friendly environment. As the political institutions are often characterised by dictatorship and patron-client relationships penetrating the whole society, the likelihood of the ruling class to extend the franchise is nonexistent. The model by Acemoglu and Robinson discussed in this paper describes the situation in the form of a game, the equilibrium depending on the type of the ruling elite. If the elites were weak and the model correct, we would have already seen the imposition of a full franchise in the countries in question. Even limited increases witnessed are few and the model explains this by portraying them, in some situations, as a sign of weakness. A possible point to continue research would be, in addition to the application on ethnic conflicts suggested by the authors, to think about the 'false' democracies that have been introduced in many poor countries as a result of orders from international financial institutions or western donor countries. Pressurizing countries, where the elite 's interest does not coincide with the full franchise, to impose one implies that the elite will continue its repression while the people get more and more dissatisfied when the outcome of an election is almost without exception to re-elect the present ruler without opposition. As the intervention of other parties in the poor countries currently acts only to contribute to the unrest, and the lack of political organization of the poor will not allow for an attempted revolution, it remains unclear what action can or should be taken to improve the political freedoms of the people in the developing world.
