Non-state norms are becoming more and more important these days. The trend towards globalisation means that in addition to states and supranational organisations, non-state organisations, communities and powerful players on the private sector such as multinational corporations have gained an important role. According to the theory of global legal pluralism, these actors have even a role of lawmaker. The term "jurispersuasion" means convincing others of one 's legitimate lawmaking power.
Michaels 2005, 1210-1211, 1212.
What qualifies as law is for the state to determine. It is ultimately a question of choice - hence the term choice of law - what is considered to be appropriate to applied in a court of law.
The influencing factors in choice of law to be considered are the needs of the international systems, the relevant policies of the form, the relevant policies of other interested states and the relative interests of those states in the determination of the particular issue, the protection of justified expectations, the basic policies underlying the particular field of law, certainty, predictability and uniformity of result and the ease in the determination and application of the law to be applied.
Stone 1995, 5.
In the English - also in most other - conflict systems choice of law is dealt with means of fairly definite rules, which refer a type of issue to a law by means of a connecting factor. Often only limited attention is paid to the content of the substantive rules. The public policy stipulations are the means to avoid oppressive, undesirable results, enabling a court to refuse to apply a rule of foreign substantive law when it does not fit the judicial conscience of the court.
Stone 1995, 5.
This essay explores the choice of law doctrine. Is it possible for a non-state source of law to be considered in choice of law? Are there cases where this has happened de facto? What is the current position on this question in the academic world and in the courts of law? Are there signs of future development?.
Today, there are two prominent cases of laws that exceed national boundaries. The autonomous laws of the Internet are one good example. There has even been discussion going on about whether the Internet should be considered its own space with its own territorial sovereignty and legal order. This depends completely on whether we recognise it as such.
Michaels 2005, 1217-1218.
Other example of this is the new lex mercatoria. The original lex mercatoria dates back to the medieval ages as the non-national law of commerce which was recognised by several treatises and decisions of court in different countries in Europe. This old body of non-state law prompted an effort to transfer it to the modern age, hence the new lex mercatoria. The new lex mercatoria is defined as an autonomous non-state legal order with special rules and special adjudicating bodies such as arbitral panels. Like it predecessor, the new lex mercatoria is meant to be applied by the courts of state.
Michaels 2005, 1219.
The debate about lex mercatoria is even more prominent than about the Internet. The applicability of lex mercatoria as "law" in litigation has been questioned many times; the debate being mainly focussed on arbitration but also includes doubts to its applicability in state courts and state conflict of laws. Those in favour of it say lex mercatoria is even superior to national laws because of its transnational character. Opponents point out no contracts can exist outside a national legal order and therefore lex mercatoria cannot substitute or replace national laws.
Michaels 2005, 1220.
Another example of a non-state normative order is the Islamic law or Shari'a. If Islamic law has been formally adopted as the law of a country, it is applicable in the same way as "regular" national laws. Without this adoption, Shari'a is outside the standard set of applicable laws. There has been a recent case where an Islamic bank stipulated that its contracts were "subject to the principles of glorious Shari'a". The judge deemed Shari'a to be not applicable under the Rome Convention on the Law Applicable to Contractual Obligations. Regardless whether Shari'a was "law" in general sense, it was not law in the sense of conflict of laws rules.
Michaels 2005, 1229.
A reasonably new attempt to create international "law" was the creation of the UNIDROIT Principles of International Commercial Contracts. Their meaning was to enable parties to select non-state law as a choice of law. Scholars are often very much in favour of them.
Michaels 2005, 1230.
Are these normative orders "law"? Legal pluralism claims that states are not the only producers of law; non-state communities can produce it as well. The old concept of legal pluralism presented no threat to states since it assumed that non-state legal orders would only exist under a state 's umbrella.
Michaels 2005, 1221.
How to define law? There are number of approaches that one can take to answer this question; commercial, sociological, anthropological and jurisprudential approaches all give different answers to the question. One can take the approach of a neutral, outside observer using objective criteria to determine what law is or one can use internal criteria to see what law looks like from the view point of participants of a certain normative order.
Michaels 2005, 1225.
State law fulfils a number of functions. Few normative orders will to do the same; one must choose a relevant function - an arbitrary one. Secondly, in any system the functions of law can be fulfilled by functionally equivalent institutions that are not law. By calling these institutions "law", the meaning of the term is twisted.
Michaels 2005, 1226.
Choice of law is an area that combines the outsider 's view with the participant 's normative interest. A court applying foreign law is an outsider that has a duty to apply that law in the spirit of the participant. Choice of law is also a field where the distinction between law and non-law is vital; after all the choice of law rules determine the applicable law.
Michaels 2005, 1227.
From a narrow view point it would seem that states reject legal pluralism through their own choice of legal regime. However, a good example that breaks this argument is the recognition of arbitral awards. States enforce arbitral awards without re-litigation on the merits of the outcome. Enforcing court will not second-guess whether the correct law was applied. Even arbitral wards given ex aequo et bono are enforced. Arbitral awards can be considered the opposite of the applied normative order as "law".
Michaels 2005, 1229.
The traditional choice of law rules can be described as quite rigid. One suggestion to counter this is to concentrate on the substantive policies behind substantive rules, and excluding the application of the rule if such application would not benefit the underlying policies to any substantial extent.
Stone 1995, 6.
The role of a judge in a multistate case is rather complicated, even when the case in question is a normal choice of law - case. One would think the traditional approach - choosing a national law that will apply - would be the easiest for a judge, but actually they leave the judge in an awkward position. The judge must use domestic tools to solve what is by nature an international problem.
Juenger 1993, 164.
Broadening the parties' ability to designate the applicable law might be a good choice. This would mean an extension of modern conflict statutes beyond the confines of contractual choice of law. The orthodox rules of choice of law are quite strict, as mentioned before. Adapting a more substantive law related approach would give them more "creative freedom", which might be favourable considering the nature of multistate cases.
Juenger 1993, 183, 192.
In its most radical form this approach calls upon the judges to take an active role in creating new "true private international law". Alternative reference rules do not require an assessment of the merits of the conflicting laws. They simply specify the desired result - the optimal protection of the claimant 's rights, for example.
Juenger 1993, 194-195.
The most famous case in this area of law might be the previously mentioned Islamic bank case, Beximco Pharmaceuticals Ltd & Ors v. Shamil Bank of Bahrain EC.
Beximco Pharmaceuticals Ltd & Ors v. Shamil Bank of Bahrain EC [2004] EWCA Civ 19.
In the leading judgment of this case Potter L.J. noted that under the Rome Convention the choice of law to govern a contract had to be a choice of the laws of a country and not a general non-national system. This was clearly established in Article 1(1) of the Rome Convention, which states that "the rules of this Convention shall apply to contractual obligations in any situation involving a choice between the laws of different countries". Lex mercatoria, general principles of law or Shari'a are clearly non-state systems of law. He also stated that while it was possible for separate parts of a contract to be governed by separate systems of law, it is not possible to make the whole contract subject to more than one law, and that also it is not possible to choose something else than law of a particular country.
McKnight 2005 in Journal of International Banking Law and Regulation.
The Court deemed the reference to the principles of Shari'a were too unclear in nature to be capable of acting as terms of the contract, because it was not clear which aspects of Shari'a were meant to be incorporated. Also the meaning and interpretation of Shari'a principles was unclear. The Court considered the reference to the principles of the Shari'a to be intended to solely reflect the fact that the bank held itself out as doing business according to Islamic religious principles, rather than as prescribing the intended meaning or content of the agreements. The court concluded that the financing agreements were meant to be governed by the rules of English law.
McKnight 2005 in Journal of International Banking Law and Regulation.
Lex mercatoria is does not come up often in case-law. One case discussing Lex mercatoria is West Tankers Inc v RAS Riunione Adriatica Sicurta SpA . In this judgment the Court concluded that parties of a contract have a right to use even Lex mercatoria - which might not represent any national system of law - in arbitration, even though arbitration might affect the substantive rights of the parties. The Court noted that the principle of party autonomy supports this, but also noted that arbitration should not be self-sustaining, but needed support from Courts and in the interests of commerce, they should give such support.
West Tankers Inc v RAS Riunione Adriatica di Sicurta SpA [2007] UKHL 4.
Westlaw UK 23.4.2007.
UNIDROIT principles are mentioned as a source of law usually in context of arbitration agreements. In ProForce Recruit Ltd v Rugby Group Ltd the court considered The UNIDROIT principles as a significant source for determining out the intentions of the parties, since the act of referring to them alone tells something about intentions of the parties.
ProForce Recruit Ltd v Rugby Group Ltd [2006] EWCA Civ 69.
LexisNexis Professional 23.4.2007.
What gives the state its special status in conflict of laws? State is just one type of a community. The state is an "imagined" community like all other communities; its boundaries are no more real or natural. Why should the state be the formal criterion in distinguishing law from non-law?.
Michaels 2005, 1247.
Globalisation means that the traditional approach - the monopolistic position of states - is becoming growingly unsuitable. The new choice of law will need a political theory to back it up. There are ideological reasons to raise non-state law to the level of state law, both on the right and the left. On the right there are proponents of free markets which a non-national system of law would undoubtedly enhance. On the left, the opinion is that referring to non-state normative orders as something else as law strips them of the positive characteristics that are associated with the term "law".
Michaels 2005, 1256.
State is the blind spot of choice of law. Legal pluralism is one way to battle this. The state as the only creator of norms in the world has been established as an illusion. Conflict of laws is however still based on the notion that the state is the sole administor of it. How should the state change that to cope with globalisation? One answer is that more awareness should be placed upon combining public and private interests in conflict-solving. This might lead to a situation where several legal system are able to claim jurisdiction and none of them is superior to the others - it is hard to say whether this is desirable either.
Michaels 2005, 1258-1259.
One of the chief factors in choice of law is achieving justice between the parties. The main difficulty with this is, of course, that standards of justice are different in different legal systems. Giving effect to the parties' intentions is one of the main principles meant to accomplish this - after all, the whole of private law is founded on the principle of party autonomy. It can be deduced from this that the parties should be able to choose the law applicable to a contract.
Clarkson and Hill 2006, 500.
Also, the parties' legitimate expectations should be protected. When parties choose a system of law it is clear they expect that system to govern the contract they make. This principle of course goes only so far as reasonable expectations. This is quite closely connected to be principle of party autonomy.
Clarkson and Hill 2006, 501.
These arguments could be used to argue, that if the parties chose that their contract should be governed for example by Shari 'a, that choice should be respected by courts. No one knows better than the parties what they want out of a contract, with what hopes they entered into it and therefore they should be considered as experts in their own case. This is of course applicable only in situation where the parties have entered into the contract willingly.
Conflict of laws will be challenged more and more by the trend of globalisation in the future. To be able to rise to the challenge it needs to be open for development, and part of the needed development might well be broadening the choice of law doctrines, and accepting a wider group of legal systems as "law". .....................
