XXI century- a time of aeroplanes, internet and fast communication. Nowadays it is possible to easily move from one place to another, to work in Europe and have a company in US, to believe in Buddha but live in Catholic country. People get used to travelling, make business all around the world, changing different jurisdictions sometimes even without noticing it. Globalisation, not without any disadvantages, can be much helpful in every day life by making things "easier and faster". Therefore, it is foreseeable that besides enjoying all that possibilities, injuries and loss across state borders will occur- from time to time resulting in a claim brought to courts. Owning to this, the question arises, which court may be the forum of the case? In fact, it would be judge 's role to first decide if the conflict of laws had occurred, then, if they are allowed to proceed. Furthermore, whether the national either foreign jurisdiction would be applicable. May non- state law- like international or religious principles can possibly be weigh in these considerations?.
Making any statements on that issue will need to debate and define the sovereignty power of State, and problems closely connected- its privileges, duties and limitations; moreover to clarify crucial differences between state and non- state law. Critically discussing mentioned concepts, additionally supported by academic discussion will be much helpful to understand why the conflict of laws recognizes itself mostly as a discussion between the states law., based on: A.Caessese; "International Law"; 2-nd edition Oxford University Press, 2005 page 98.
What is more, which connecting factors would be taken into account (domicile, nationality, place of performance etc.)?.
The main characteristic of bilateral, multilateral agreements is that the parties- states are bounded to respect and recognize each other judgments, making them legally valid and binding for signatories. Nowadays, in so called "globalization time", because the conflict of law rules are applicable much more often, states by joining different organizations, hope that besides the advantages they can potentially obtain from the financial and political cooperation with others, they would be able to standardize their legal systems among each other. Harmonisation and mutual recognition of legislation is a complex issue, requiring huge time expenditure. Firstly, parties must treat other members equally, respect their sovereignty power and look upon as a subject of international law. While these conditions are fulfilled, recognition and enforcement process may be faster and become more effective.
Looking at the EC example it must be admitted that the Brussels Regulation or Rome Convention (applicable to contractual obligations) fulfil its role in uniting conflict of law rules among UE Member States. Thus by assuring certainty and stability, encourages to start businesses on common market etc. With clear, written conflict of law rules, "the choice" becomes become much easier task.
The power to act induces creation of an autonomous legal system exercising jurisdiction through properly constituted system of courts, in adition generate the opportunity for states to claim respect from another countries for its political independence and territorial integrity.
Accordingly to "religious law" usually it does not have one, unanimously comprehend system of rules, moreover its enforcement is rarely supported by means of coercion. Non State systems would never obtain this same equality under the international law as state one, although they may be very powerful and influential, for instance as Jewish of Islamic religion. A good example of this observation may be find in A. Huxley publication - where two members of Jewish community in Germany committed a murder. Of course, the Diaspora did not have any criminal jurisdiction over such a matter- despite that, the Rabbi thought that it is reasonable to intervene. It was said that the offender who was seeking for atonement "shall for the rest of his days carefully observe the anniversary ...date of killing", "shall fast at that time", "be active in all enterprises to free imprisoned Jews". The enforcement of Rabbi 's "statement" was possible only by voluntarily (!) submitting to his jurisdiction and obeying it. Resuming, besides the state jurisdiction, non state law may function as an additional system, exercised by people who profess similar principles (derived from religious beliefs or others), consequently punishing or excluding members while not complying with i.e. loyalty and morality. often recognized as a symbol of independence and treated as the principal source of legitimation.
A.Huxley; "Religion, Law and Tradition", RoutledgeCurzon 2000; London, page 42.
Ibid, page 42; citation from S.M Passamaneck in Hecht, "Introduction to the history and sources of Jewish Law", 1996, Oxford. by i.e. aware faithful.
Of course, the exclusion or punishment may be motivated by many reasons, not necessarily disobeying the set of moral values and principles etc.
While countries are able to limit the citizen 's freedom (to protect others rights, enforcing judgments etc.), infer its power usually from constitutional devise, the non state law have to be based on other principles like i.e. ethics. Additionally while states can possibly derive their ability to act from the territory power, the religion precautions may be possibly obeyed across the borders.
In fact differently, not necessarily as a set of rules, what consequently make the main principles less understandable and vague. Based on : Ibid; page 176 "Christianism is two fold (Eastern and Western), Buddhism (Chinese, Pali and Tibetan) and Islam (Kharijite, Shi'ite and Sunnite) are threefold".
Both State and non state law can possibly contain a core of values that community members have to regard, but the crucial difference it that the state rules are supported by the remedies (penalties) that may be applied and enforced. It is important to mention that, while it is possible to sigh out from i.e. religious, other community, it is impossible to stay without any citizenship. Thus, it would not be possible to refrain from any penalties or another punishment applied by State. . In other words there is no "escape" from the State rules, while it is highly possible to change religion or sign out from any "ethical" agreement .That is why we can not treat non state and the state law as equals. Moreover looking at the academic discussion it has to be admitted that the choice of law rules define "itself" as discussed only between the state law, when other regulations are treated only as peripheral.
Jurisdiction may be regarded also as an aspect of State sovereignty, tracked back to Jean Bodin analyses he have written in "Six Books of the Republique", published in 1576.; based on: J.O'Brien "Smith 's Conflict of laws", Cavendish Publishing Ltd; 2-nd edition, London, 1999, p.17.
There are some exceptions, which will not be considered in this essay; i.e. group of people who lost their citizenship in extremely rare circumstances, so called "stateless person".
Even if a person would try to escape, mutual agreements, cooperation in police and judicial matters (III pillar of the UE) permit to act on their behalf other States to follow our presence. In other words there is no escape from the State rules, while it is highly possible to change religion or sign out from any agreement.
R. Michaels; "The Re-State-Ment Of Non-State Law: The State, Choice Of Law, And The Challenge From Global Legal Pluralism".
For the purposes of private International Law, state is defined as an entity possessing its own legislation and courts, formed by the group of people who lives on the territory with defined boundaries. Moreover, treated as a sovereign body and direct subject to the international affairs, possessing the ability to settle any mutual or multilateral agreement with other states.
That is why; the very first set of choice law rules was presuming that the applicable law would be always connected to the land actually occupied by a person.
With respect and recognition of other legal systems.
Therefore, each of potential signatory would be obliged, using every possible legal "tool" to comply with the agreed statements. In fact, that is the main difference in comparison with the non- state law.
A.Cassese, "International law", 2-nd edition Oxford University Press 2005; page 10-15.
While the State can use penal, administrative and other remedies, the non state law does not have this opportunity. Of course, can impose some moral penalties but not in a sense of "enforceable", real punishment. Additionally, so called "social contract doctrine" shows the connection, between the "rights" and "duties" related to the State role, while habitants have to be loyal and obey rules, the State (in non- technical sense) will defend their interests.
One of the reasons why choice of law do not recognize itself as state either non state is to protect parties from uncertainty and unenforceability, causing potentially harmful consequences. Parties do not possess sufficient legal "strength" to effect by force its contractual obligation in case of applying non state law. Each Diaspora may regard a concept which seems to be uniform- differently. Therefore, if such a definition would be included into contract, may prospectively cause big misunderstanding,for instance Sharia Law is thought by the Maliki, Hanibali, Hanafi, Shafi scholars who had expressed different point of view on interpretation of Quran verses. In other words, it must be admitted that even thought that sacred books usually contain a core of rules, because of its different definitions and consequently- vagueness, they can not be choose to govern any, especially contractual obligations.
Or maybe it would be better described as a lack of protection, when the performance of an obligation can not be supported by state power from: "Introduction to Islamic law" module materials, Warwick 2006-7.
It is highly important cause "this should tell the parties how and where any dispute between them is to be determined"; supra note 20.
In fact, we may consider circumstances, when Muslim parties (i.e. very faithful) have chosen jurisdiction under the law of Shariat; should it be recognized as valid? Additionally, possessing freedom of contracting, the right to choose jurisdiction preferable to the parties. The case of Shamil Bank shows that "English courts will not permit a debtor to avoid or delay paying his debt simply by arguing, belatedly, that a contract which the debtor was happy to enter into and take the benefit of at the time, offends religious principles by allegedly not being Sharia compliant" It clearly shows that matters connected to trading are not secured enough when the agreement is based on "mere" spiritual principles and why courts will not take them into account as binding and enforceable.
D.Scott; "Who  s Interested In Disputes Anyway?" ; Mondaq Business Briefing 19 October 2005(c); 2005 Mondaq Ltd.
Lloyd 's List , "Shamil ruling may win over Islamic banks" ;4 February 2004(c) 2004 Informa UK Ltd.
R.Griffiths; "Legal certainty? " Legal Week, 23 June 2005; Legal Week Global Media.
It would be always possible to withdraw from the religion, but never from the state obligation. Thus, for both parties -even the most religious one- to avoid prospective problems would be safer to choose the state law rules applicable to their performance.
There are countries were the system of law was established as an isolated from the religious principles, usually those created artificially by the division of conglomerate states and in last decades like i.e. Byelorussia, Slovakia, Monaco. Concluding, in those places the consideration regarding choice of law will usually not take into account any religious principles, however may debate other non- state systems for instance UNIDROIT principles or local community rules or customs disconnected with the state regulations.
Of, course there is always tension between them, but not "within them" ;David and Brieley; "Major Legal System in the World Today" (1978)- cited in A.Huxley; "Religion, Law and Tradition", RoutledgeCurzon 2000; London, page 34.
All around the world there are areas where the state law was derived mostly from the religious principles, compromised later with a "secular" international relations. In those countries, many ethical rules derived from the belief or custom would be implemented to the state law, recognized as both: religious and state duty.
The very best example of this would be Pakistan- State which compromised the Muslim law principles with the rules governing "modern, democratic, protecting human rights" countries, for example by enforcing act regulating family matters before justify only under Quran legal rules, now by the Muslim Family Law Ordinance.
However some of them would be still applicable only under Muslim, Jewish of other non state regimes. Then, it would be debatable, to what extent it is be possible to choose religious law, for example which law would be applicable to the woman who got married under the law of Muslim country X which legal "secular" system do not recognize polygamous marriages that she have step into, but among the country this custom is often, successfully performed on the basis of Quran verses?.
Jewish law was dealing with two concepts, different of both objective and subjective matter. After the Israel was established as an independent State, the movement of extremely conservative Orthodoxies have started persuading that, the law of this country should adopt traditional Jewish law as a legislation to be in force.
Dissenting view of the author (A.H.) in described academic discussion; from: A.Huxley; "Religion, Law and Tradition", RoutledgeCurzon 2000; London, page 35.
In Jews history it is possible to observe other clashes between state and non state law- while Rabbis were advising to the local contemporary authorities as what to do in particular circumstances. In other words, a result of those "consultations" as not restricted to the letter of secular law but more to the "Torah 's point of view" was implementing non state law to the state 's system. In fact this illustrates a situation different from the above where the whole system is heavily influenced by ethical, moral and religious leader 's explanations, possibly creating and supporting the final "state" decision.
Ibid, page 43.
Additionally, and what may be even more surprising for the secular country citizens, "halakhah" - described as religious law, is applicable to the secular part of Jewish population of Israel, submitting matters connected to marriage and divorce to the exclusive jurisdiction of the rabbinical courts. enforced within the power of Knesset, Israelis' parliament thus achieved directly from the State.
On the one hand it seems to be problematic , can possibly the country X shift a part of its legal power, (derived from the sovereignty power etc. to act as it was discussed above) on non state authorities and still protect the best interest of its citizens, even it is impossible to scrutinize the behaviour of mentioned bodies? Thus, if it is agreed that because of possessing sovereignty power, State may enforce any legislation- does it mean also the ability to set legislation diminishing its power? The question become less hypothetical while trying to answer, what would happen if foreign jurisdiction would need to apply Israeli family law? Would it be shifted to religious system of "halakhah" and above all, would "halakhah" be recognized as state law? Possibly, the logic will provide reasonable solution- if a sovereignty body, with all its power can form the independent legal rules, consequently should be able to shift its power on -in its view- "reliable "authorities" i.e. explaining that they can work more effectively, with experience collected trough years etc.
Ibid, page 46. The enforceability of "halakhah" is very controversial at present, even among very conservative Orthodox community in Israel. "The supernatural character of its main source makes Canon Law a religious legal system" Following this statement, in 2007 parishioners of St. Brigid Church brought a claim for "judicial review" of the decision of local archdiocese. Thus, Ontario Superior Court had to settle if it is possible for Canadian, secular court to force a "catholic institution" to reconsider their decision. Furthermore, many questionable issues arises- can national legal system possibly govern a case involving administrative matters of Catholic Church, bearing in mind that its administration is accountable exclusively to canon law? Consequently, would it be possible to examine its "procedural fairness" in case of reasonable suspicion that they failed to comply with canon law? What is important court did not recognize this claim as an i.e. contractual obligation between parishioners (who were paying money) referencing to national, Canadian legal system, but was analyzing if the canon law may be applicable and if "an entity" created whitin state 's power possesses ability to decide under non state principles?.
A.Huxley; "Religion, Law and Tradition", RoutledgeCurzon 2000; London, page 75.
N. Baute; "Court should get involved in church matter, court hears: Canon law was made in feudal times, not in democratic society, lawyer argues ", The Ottawa Citizen, 15 February 2007.
Here to: to close the church ; Citation from: N. Baute; "Court should get involved in church matter, court hears: Canon law was made in feudal times, not in democratic society, lawyer argues ", The Ottawa Citizen, 15 February 2007.
No decision was made yet, because court reserved its decision.
Similar case where parishioners were trying to sue church- in state court under the civil law was described by S. Maull in his article "Harlem parishioners sue to block destruction of church", 29 September 2004, Associated Press Newswires, The Associated Press. The claimants were stating that "Under canon law... facilities and assets of a parish belong to the parishioners in the community where they are located".
In order to provide clear overview of the central problem it would be reasonable to discuss potential effect of implementation non state rules to the states' legal system.
In the case Al Bassam v. al Bassam the problem of the deceased 's domicile at his death occurred. It was the issue of great importance, because the law of domicile was determining the material or essential validity of the disposition of movables. There was a question if the Islamic or the English law should be applied in that case. What was most important, if the Islamic law would be applicable, thus the succession would be governed by the Hanbali school of Sharia law, because at the date of death deceased 's domicile was Saudi Arabian. In fact, no all system of the Islamic law and Sharia principles, but incorporated to the State law of Saudi Arabia religious rules was considered only as applicable! Therefore, was described as the only one, that it is possible to rely upon, on international level, moreover which might be discussed by the foreign courts while dealing with conflict of laws issues. In fact, the question will arise how this kind of non state law rules implemented to state legal system should be described? In my opinion, by this "passage" they are changing their status and consequently become state rules. Maybe that is the golden powder if the debate starts again?.
Al-Bassam v Al-Bassam (Preliminary Issues); (Ch D) Chancery Division; 6 November 2002, Westlaw; link provided in bibliography; point 8 of judgment.
I agree with a statement made by Jacques Vanderlinden that individuals belong to many societies and many social networks, as a consequence it may be admitted that a man is a multi- social, cultural being. State law does not possess any exclusive rights to produce norms and govern all aspects of human behaviour. In legal pluralism many sub- legal system may coexist, without making any harm to others. Therefore we can belong to different communities and be an object of many sub system, but when it comes to the point only the state law would be recognizable and enforceable. We can potentially submit ourselves to other i.e. religious jurisdiction and obey their decision, abandon punishments but it would always depend on our will, chosen voluntarily. It is a common practice in religious countries to implement non state rules into national legislation. As a result of this transformation even having ethical, religious- others roots they would be recognized as a "state 's" to which choice of law can successfully refer.
J. Vanderlinden "Religious Laws as system of law - A comparatist 's view"; chapter 11 in A.Huxley; "Religion, Law and Tradition", RoutledgeCurzon 2000; London, page 178.
