Vinyl polymers and block copolymers of methacrylates can be synthesized using an alkyl bromide initiator and a copper(I) catalyst of different ligands via living radical polymerisation.
Living polymerization is a form of addition polymerization that is free from side reactions such as termination and chain transfer. This can give polymers of defined architectures and molecular weights (M w). The number of polymer chains is limited by the number of initiator molecules. The growing chains can polymerize infinitely until the concentration of monomer ceases. The effectiveness of this polymerization is to produce a narrow PDi polymer of controlled number-average molecular weight (M n).1,2 A ratio of M w to M n would give a narrow PDi of around 1.1. PDi is the polydispersity index which is the measure of the distribution of molecular mass in a polymer sample. This allows a vast amount of different polymer structure such as block co-polymers, graft co-polymers, star polymers to be made. The introduction of free radicals into this form of polymerization enables the synthesis of a range of polymers to be achieved but relieving all the constraints of anionic transfer polymerization. Constraints such as clean glassware, pure reagents and pure solvents are required as termination can be achieved by abduction of H+ source from the environment. The termination process can be avoided by the using a suitable halogen as a "cap" to the active growing radical species.1,2.
Matyjaszewski 3 and Sawamoto 4 developed the use of low valent, late metal complexes as halogen transfer agents. Many transition metals such as nickel, palladium, iron have been reported but recent work showed that copper(I) based complexes are effective at conventional free- radical polymerization, living polymerization and the investigation of ratios of co-polymerisation.5,6 Copper(I) bromide was used to react with 2 ligands to form a Copper(I) square planar complex as a ligand catalyst (Scheme 2).1 The synthesis of all ligands, intiator, polymers and block copolymer must be done under nitrogen in order to prevent copper(I) being oxidaised to copper(II). Ligands of different types can be prepared by undergoing a condensation reaction with primary amines with pyridine-2-carboxaldehyde (Scheme 1).1 These are ligands for copper (I) catalyst for a range of methacrylates in toluene. Propyl ligand and pentyl ligand were synthesized in order to investigate the effect of R group chain length on rate of polymerisation. A range of phenolic esters can be used as the initiator. 2- Napthol initiator was synthesized by undergoing an esterification of 2- napthol with 2- bromobutyryl bromide in the presence of triethylamine (Scheme 3).2.
Methyl methacrylate (MMA) and butyl methacrylate (BMA) were used as monomers in order to examine the effects of R group chain length on the rate of polymerization. The C-Br bond can cleave homolytically to give two radical species; (Initiator) I   and Br   .
Note: The chemical composition of the "y" repeating unit might not have an alternating pattern but a more complex or a random pattern.
Block copolymers can also be synthesized by adding a second monomer. The reactivity of both monomers can be examined. MMA was used as the first monomer and benzyl methyacrylate (BzMA) was used as the second monomer.
Propyl ligand was synthesized and characterised using proton NMR and FT- IR. FT- IR of the starting materials for propyl ligand were collected so the reaction can be tracked. Yield: 11.0834g, 73%; boiling point: 94- 96  c. FT- IR of pyridine-2-carboxaldehyde: 1708 cm -1, (  C=O), FT-IR of propyl amine: 3367 and 3288 cm -1 and FT- IR of propyl ligand: 1649 cm -1 (Fig 7), (  C=N). 1H NMR (CDCl 3, 298 K, 250 MHz):    1.0 (t, 3H), 1.75 (p, 2H), 3.45 (t, 2H), 7.35 (t, 1H), 7.7 (t, 1H), 8.0 (d, 1H), 8.35 (s, 1H), 8.65 (d, 1H). (Fig 11). Pentyl ligand and 2-napthol initiator were also synthesized and characterised using FT-IR and 1H NMR. The melting point of 2-napthol initiator was also obtained.
The living radical polymerisation was carried out by reacting monomer(s) (MMA or MMA and BzMA or BMA), 2-napthol initiator, a ligand and CuBr in toluene at 90  c. In order to investigate the effects of different monomers and ligands on the polymerisation and the chemical compostition of polymers, five different polymerisation reactions were devised (Table 1). The polymers were isolated by precipitation. 10.0457 g of white polymer A was formed. The polymer was characterised by FT-IR with the key signal at 1724 cm -1 (Fig 10), (  CO-O).
For each polymerisation reaction, a sample was taken at 2, 4 and 28 hours for 1H NMR and GPC analysis (Fig 11-17). The relative concentrations of free MMA monomer [M] and bound MMA monomer [M p] can be analysed through the relative integral sizes from the NMR signals at    = 3.5 ppm and 3.65 ppm respectively hence giving the % conversion (Table 2). The initial concentration of MMA monomers at t = 0 equals to [M] + [M p]. As the reaction progresses, the ratio of [M]/[M p] decreases gradually which successfully show that the polymer chain is propagating. The rate of chain propagation Ratep can be lead to expression (1), where kp is a constant and [M  ] is the concentration of radicals formed.6 (1).
In theory, termination does not occur in living radical polymerisation so therefore Kt = 0 thus [M  ] equals the concentration of initiator [I] and this does not change with time, t; hence giving expression (2).6 (2).
This indicates that a plot of ln([M]0/[M]) against time is linear, with the time = 0 and the gradient = kp[M  ]; i.e.: kinetic plot.1,2 Degree of polymerisation (DP n) is the ratio of [M p]/[I] at a specific % conversion or the number of repeating units in a polymer. Theoretical DP n can be calculated using the ratio of [M]/[I] at a % conversion obtained from 1H NMR at a specific time. A plot of M n against % conversion would give an indication of the DP n.1,2.
From the GPC analysis, the experimental M n, M w and PDi can be obtained (Table 2). A narrow PDi should be obtained due to the mechanism of polymerisation. Theoretical Mn can be calculated using equation 3, where M o is the mass of the repeating unit, M wI is the molecular weight of the initiator and    is the extent of reaction (e.g.: 50% conversion,    = 0.5). (3).
The kinetic plot indicates the rate of polymerisation reactions using different ligands and monomers. All polymerisations showed linear lines with y- intercept of 0. A, B, D and E showed very good fit but however, C did not. A possible reason is that the polymer chains have stopped propagation before 28 hours which was indicated with the low final % conversion. Early termination could be due to combination of two radical chains or disproportionation. Another possible reason is the low initiator efficiency which is caused by also combination of two initiator radicals and disproportionation. This is reflected by the high PDi of about 2. Similarly, A PDi of about 2 can be observed for polymerisation D at 28 hours. However, this is not due to early termination but a low [M  ]. The % conversion was so high that the growing polymer chains have lack of monomer radicals to propagate so therefore forced to terminate via combination. C showed a higher rate than D which suggested that MMA might give a higher rate of polymerisation than BzMA. Exception were at the 28 hours samples of C and D which all gave a PDi of around 1.1 indicating that there is a narrow molecular weight distribution with this living radical polymerisation, i.e.: the polymer chains are of very similar length. A possible explanation for this is that BzMA is more bulky therefore reacts slower hence the rate of propagation is lower. This was also supported by the % conversion of BzMA relative to MMA at 4 hours. The % conversion ratio was 100 %.
MMA: 0 % BzMA. This is only an estimate as the block copolymer would consists of a block of just MMA monomers then a mixture of MMA and BzMA which is followed by just BzMA monomers. The length of each block vary according to reactivity of the monomer. The pattern of the mixture block is hard to predict. The pattern could be random or could be defined. The exact length of each blocks is not known but however, it can be predicted. If BzMA was added at an earlier stage, the block of MMA would be smaller and the mixture block would be bigger than and the BzMA block would be smaller than if it was added at a later stage. Block copolymers show a higher rate as the [M  ] is doubled.
Even though the end polymer made by A and B are the same, the rate of polymerisation is not. This is due to the ligand attached to the copper(I) catalyst. Pentyl ligand showed a slightly higher rate than propyl ligand. Pentyl ligand has a longer R group so therefore is more soluble in organic solvents such as toluene than propyl ligand.7 The more soluble it is, the more catalyst took part in the reaction. However, there must be an optimum R group which its solubility reaches maximum.1 A and E have the same ligand in the reaction but a different monomer. A showed a higher rate than E. This could be due to the same reason as BzMA monomer. BMA is more hindered than MMA therefore would tend to react slower.
A general trend of M n increases as the % conversion of polymer increases. All showed linear lines with the y-intercept of 0. A and B showed similar trend but B showed a higher Mn trend which indicated that the DP n is higher for B. This is also due to the solubility of the ligand . Polymeirsations of A and.
E used different monomers in which E gave a higher M n trend indicating a higher DP n. The linear line of E is steeper than A as BMA used in E has a higher M w than MMA used in A. The R group on the monomer is also longer hence more soluble in toluene therefore allowing a higher DP n. A similar trend can be observed for C and D. D showed a higher M n trend indicating a higher DP n. A possible explaination is that.
BzMA is of a higher M w therefore adding BzMA earlier could increase the M n. The theoretical Mn lines are lower than the experimental due to initiator inefficiency so therefore giving longer chains than expected.
The tacticities of the polymers can be analysed using 1H NMR (Table 3 and Fig 11-14). Syndiotactic arrangement dominated in A as it would give the minimum amount of steric hindrance therefore most favourable.
Many errors can easily be induced. The extent of purging with nitrogen varies between individuals, the ligands and initiator used were different as some of the data were collected from another group. The quantities of reactants and the temperature of polymerisation also vary. From this investigation, one can conclude that the longer the R chain length on the ligand, the higher the rate of polymerisation until it reaches an optimum length. Higher M w monomer would have a slower rate of polymerisation and has a higher M n . Polymers of narrow PDi can be made using living radical polymerisation with high conversion rates.1,2 Block copolymers of narrow PDi can also be made but the total polymerisation time must be shorter in order to avoid termination but could give a lower conversion rate. Other innovation steps such as investigation of different initiator, different metal catalyst 3,4, different halogen on intiator and different reaction temperature.
