The overall Harcourt - Essen reaction is: with a proposed mechanism of bimolecular steps:
The differential rate equation is then:
The slow, rate determining step was investigated by measuring the rate of loss of hydrogen peroxide, this being proportional to d[H 3O 2+] / dt. Any iodine formed was reconverted to iodide by addition of thiosulphate (see method):
Therefore [I-] was kept approximately constant and pseudo-first order kinetics could be assumed:
The integrated rate equation for such a first order reaction is:
Plotting the natural logarithm of the initial [H2O2] divided by [H2O2] at each time interval, against time would yield a straight line of gradient k'. Knowing the amount of I- used, k can be found.
By repeating the experiment at various temperatures, the Arrhenius parameters of the Harcourt-Essen reaction can be determined: k = A exp(-E/RT) where E is the activation energy, A the pre-exponential constant, R the gas constant and T the temperature in Kelvin. Linearising:
Therefore a plot of lnk (for each temperature) against 1/T enables calculation of A and E. 4 different runs of the experiment were carried out sequentially using:
Solutions were kept in thermostatted water baths for 15 mins for temperature equilibration and mixed vigorously and continuously. 10 drops starch indicator were added to each mixture.
H 2O 2 (25cm 3, 4vol.) was kept in a separate flask at the required temperature, prior to addition. Sodium thiosulphate (1.5cm 3, 0.094M) was added to the iodide/acid mixture, then the H 2O 2 and a stopclock started. When the starch indicator turned green/blue, the time was noted and 0.5cm 3 thiosulphate added. This was repeated until 9cm 3 of thiosulphate had been added. The reaction flask was kept to one side for later use.
Note 1: the blue colour was due to iodine complexing with starch; the iodine being formed by H 2O 2 oxidising I- and so being consumed. The immediate addition of thiosulphate reduced the iodine back to I- rendering the solution colourless again until more H 2O 2 oxidised I- to reform iodine. Thus the cumulative volume of thiosulphate was inversely proportional to the concentration of H 2O 2 remaining in the reaction flask.
Note 2: Towards the end of run 2, the appearance of the blue/green colour was not so sharp, so the individual error in time recorded will be greatest here.
By the time all 4 runs had been completed (~2hrs) reaction flask 1 was assumed to have gone to completion and reaction flask 3 (left standing for 1.25 hours) was heated in a 45 oC water bath for 20mins to achieve completion, i.e all H 2O 2 used up.
Reaction flasks 1 & 2 were simultaneously titrated with sodium thiosulphate in 0.5cm 3 portions as before until no blue/green colour appeared for 20minutes. The final thiosulphate titre volume was proportional to the initial concentration of peroxide: [H 2O 2]t=0 and.
Therefore, H 2O 2: S 2O 3 2- ratio is 1:2mol. S 2O 3 2- used=15.6/1000*0.99 =1.55*10 -2.
Therefore mol. H 2O 2 in 25cm 3= 7.753*10 -3 [H2O2] =(7.753*10 -3)/25*1000 = 0.3101M.
In the table below: A is equivalent to [H 2O 2]t=0 , x is the vol. of S 2O 3 added c is equivalent to [H 2O 2]t which is A-x.
For a plot of c -1 against time, a straight line would indicate a second order reaction w.r.t to peroxide since for: when integrated.
Looking closely at the above graph, the relationship between c -1 and time is not linear but an upward curve and so the Harcourt-Essen reaction is not 2 nd w.r.t to peroxide.
Plotting ln(A/c) against 1/time:
There is a clear linear correlation corresponding to first order kinetics w.r.t peroxide. Similarly for the runs 2,3 and 4:
The gradient of each graph gives k', the pseudo-first order rate constant where k'=k[I-] k is calculated in the table below. Note: values for k' calculated in MS Excel to more significant figures than shown in the above graphs.
Run 2 has half the concentration of iodide as Run 1;both at the same temperature, and k' is almost half, within limits of experimental error. This is consistent with a directly proportional relationship between rate and iodide concentration and so the reaction is also 1 st order w.r.t to iodide.
Runs 3 and 4, at higher temperatures, show faster rates. The empirical rule of an approximate doubling of rate for every 10 oc increase in temperature seems borne out by the values of k for runs 1 and 4:8.68/4.31 = 2.014.
The following table sets out the data needed to calculate Arrhenius parameters:
Gradient of regression line = -E/R where R=8.31451 JK -1mol -1.
Intercept of regression line = lnA.
During all 4 runs, the concentration of iodide can be assumed to be constant due to the regular addition of thiosulphate, so reducing the iodine formed back to iodide. Therefore, assuming the rate determining step involves no other species than H 3O 2+ and I-, the straight line graph of ln(A/c) against time for all 4 runs, shows 1st order w.r.t H 3O 2+ (=H 2O 2).
Runs 1 and 2 (half the iodide concentration, half the pseudo-first order rate constant) showed the reaction to be 1 st order w.r.t to I- and thus, 2nd order overall. The mechanism discussed in the introduction is a valid proposal.
The difficulty in determining the initial concentration of peroxide will have been a significant source of error for the actual [H 2O 2] calculation. Reaction flask 1 had been left to stand for 2 hours, and flask 3 for 1.25 hours as well as being heated for 20mins. It was assumed all the peroxide had been used up by then. However, during this 'infinite time' titration, even after periods as long as 20mins, the blue colour would reappear; due to time limits in the laboratory, there had to be a cut-off point. This would not affect the values of the calculated rate constant since the gradient of ln(A/c) against time will have been the same.
The linear regression equation used for calculating the Arrhenius parameters was based on 3 measurements. For a more precise and accurate determination of the collision frequency factor A, and activation energy E, the experiment would need to be repeated at many more temperatures. This would allow for statistically meaningful confidence intervals to be measured for each parameter.
