Crystal Violet (((4-bis(p-(dimethylamino)phenyl)methylene)-2,5-cyclohexadien-1-ylidene) exists in two resonance forms of which can be bleached by the addition of hydroxyl ions that reacts via a dramatic colour change. This dramatic colour change allows the kinetics of the reaction to be monitored. The kinetics of this reaction is investigated by probing the effects of varying concentration, temperature and ionic strength; allowing the rate, order and activation energy of the reaction to be calculated.
The two resonance forms of crystal violet are shown below (fig 1):
The addition of hydroxyl ions via a source as for example NaOH, leads to attack of the hydroxyl ion at the positive carbon in the tertiary carbocation resonance form, of crystal violet. This forms the carbinol compound (fig 2) and occurs via a dramatic colour change from intense purple to colourless.
Changing the concentration of NaOH and crystal violet will enable the rate and order of the reaction to be calculated. Varying the temperature and ionic strength of the solution by addition of KNO 3 and CaCl 2 will be monitored for there resulting effects on the kinetics of this reaction.
A UV spectrophotometer was used throughout all the experiments to monitor the colour change of the reaction. Throughout this experiment the concentration of crystal violet must not exceed 5 x 10 -6 M as above this concentration crystal violet does not obey Beer-Lamberts Law. The concentration of NaOH throughout the experiment has to remain in excess to ensure the reaction goes to completion and to enable the concentration of the NaOH to remain relatively unchanged. Running a UV spectrum of crystal violet showed the maximum absorption of the molecule to be at 590nm, therefore throughout the experiment this wavelength was used.
The starting crystal violet solution was prepared in a ratio of 1:3 stock solution:water resulting in crystal violet concentration of 5.52 x 10 -5 mol dm -3. The absorbance of this was recorded by removing an aliquot of the solution and placing it into a cuvette that was placed into a UV spectrophotometer. The solution was then diluted further by 1:1 with water and the absorbance recorded again. This continued until the concentration of the crystal violet solution became 1.73 x 10 -6 mol dm -3.
The temperatures used were 25 oC, 30 oC, 35 oC and 40 oC.
The crystal violet stock solution was made up with crystal violet (11.032 cm 3) made up to 250cm 3 with water that results in a crystal violet concentration of 9.743 x 10 -6 mol dm -3. The solutions of crystal violet (9.743 x 10 -6M), NaOH (0.1M) and KNO 3 (1.0M) were left in a water bath to reach the specific temperature. Once the required temperature was reached 1ml of crystal violet, 1ml of NaOH and 0.1ml of KNO 3 were added to a cuvette and placed into a thermostated cell in the UV spectrophotometer to scan absorbance every 10 seconds for 15 minutes. This method was repeated 3 times for each of the four temperatures. The time in between mixing of the solutions in the cuvette and placing the cuvette into the UV spectrophotometer were recorded.
The starting crystal violet solution again was made up with crystal violet (11.032 cm 3) made up to 250cm 3 with water that results in a crystal violet concentration of (9.743 x 10 -6M) mol dm -3.
The different concentrations were set up as follows (table 1):
For each [NaOH] the required quantities were placed into a cuvette to which 0.2ml of KNO 3 was added to ensure the ionic strength remains constant. The cuvette was placed into the UV spectrophotometer to scan absorbance every 10 seconds for 15 minutes. This method was carried out for each of the NaOH concentrations. The time in between mixing of the solutions in the cuvette and placing the cuvette into the UV spectrophotometer were recorded. The solution of NaOH concentration 0.045 mol dm -3 was run three times to calculate an error that can be applied to the rest of the results for the varying [NaOH].
The method is carried out in the same manner as for the varying NaOH concentrations; however the solutions were prepared as shown below (table 2):
The solution of crystal violet concentration 6.25 x 10 -6 mol dm -3 was run three times to calculate an error that can be applied to the rest of the results for the varying of crystal violet concentration.
The starting crystal violet solution was made up with 25cm 3 crystal violet (2.21 x 10 -4 M) made up to 250cm 3 with water that results in a crystal violet concentration of (2.21 x 10 -5 M).
The starting concentration and volume crystal violet and NaOH will be the same throughout this experiment. This experiment will involve using two different salts, KNO 3 and CaCl 2.
The concentration of the salt were prepared as shown in the table below (table 3), to provide the ionic strength required: 1ml of the prepared [KNO 3] solution was added to a cuvette with 1ml crystal violet (2.21 x 10 -5 M) and 1ml NaOH (0.1M). The cuvette was placed into the UV spectrophotometer to scan absorbance every 10 seconds for 30 minutes. This method was carried out for each of the KNO 3 concentrations. The time in between mixing of the solutions in the cuvette and placing the cuvette into the UV spectrophotometer were recorded. The solution of no presence of KNO 3 was run three times to calculate an error that can be applied to the rest of the results for the varying [KNO 3].
The method for the CaCl 2 salt is carried out in the same way as before with the varying [KNO 3] however the CaCl 2 concentrations were made up in a different way as shown below (table 4) due to its different ionic strength to that of KNO 3:
The concentrations are prepared by weighing out the required amount of CaCl 2 and then making it up to 100cm 3 with water.
Schematically the reaction looks like this:
Crystal violet + hydroxyl ion     carbinol compound.
The rate law of this reaction is:
Where k is the rate constant, m is the order with respect to OH- and n is the order with respect to CV+. As the [OH-] is in excess the as the reaction occurs to completion the crystal violet has fully reacted however the [OH-] has relatively remained unchanged. Therefore, the rate equation can be changed to account for this.
Taking natural logs of this expression results in:
Therefore a plot of ln(k') versus ln[OH-] will result in a straight line and the gradient will equal m, the order of the reaction that is rounded to the nearest integer, and a y intercept of ln(k) which results in the rate constant. k' is the initial rate of the reaction, which can be found by calculating the gradient of the data in the initial part of the reaction (first 60 secs).
Using the Arrhenius Equation:
Taking logs:
Therefore a plot of ln(k) versus 1/T will result in a straight line where the gradient will be - Ea/R and therefore the activation energy (Ea) can be calculated as R is the gas constant (8.314 x 10 -3 mol dm -3). k can be calculated from calculating k' as like before and then applying it to the k' equation:
Therefore, k can be found by a simple rearrangement as the concentration of OH- is known for each value of k'.
The following equation allows determination of the effect of adding an inert salt to a reaction:
By plotting log(k obs/k obs(I=0)) versus    I the resulting gradient is 2A ZAZB.
The ionic strength is calculated with the following formula:
If the gradient is positive, then Z A and Z B must be of the same sign, which in turn indicates that adding the inert salt causes the rate of the reaction to increase.
If the gradient is negative, then Z A and Z B must be different in sign, which in turn indicates that adding the inert salt causes the rate of the reaction to decrease.
The linearity of the plot of ln Absorbance against time plots establishes that the reaction is a pseudo first order reaction. This was further confirmed as changing the concentration of crystal violet did not change the observed rate constant. The pseudo first order rate constant k' was obtained from of ln Absorbance versus time using a least squares analysis. All the sets of data were extrapolated back to account for time between mixing the solution in the cuvette and placing the cuvette into the UV spectrophotometer. This was done by using the FORECAST function.
The error of a measurement is measured by the difference between the actual value of a physical quantity and the measured value of the quantity.:
From the formula, the following data was required to calculate the activation energy (table 5):
The gradient from (fig 3) is -6938.8. Therefore; (Literature value 1 = ).
The value calculated for the activation energy is ~ 8 kJ mol -1 lower than that of the literature value. This may be due to experimental error.
The table below shows each rate constant calculated for each temperature compared that of the literature 2 values:
The calculated values for the rate constant at each temperature are not accurate with that of the literature value, however they do follow the same trend.
This involved plotting ln[OH-] versus ln(k') to obtain the gradient and the y intercept. This data is shown in the table below (table 6): . Turgeon J.C.; LaMer V.K., Journal American Chemical Society, 74 (1952) 5988.
The value in red was indicated as an anomaly and so removed from the calculation.
The rest of the data was plotted against each other as shown in the graph below (fig 4) to calculate the gradient and y intercept:
The gradient is 1.328 which rounding to the nearest integer gives an order of 1 with respect to the concentration of OH-. Comparing to the literature3 value the same pseudo rate first order was found and that the order is 1 with respect to the concentration of OH-.
The y intercept results in -1.3065 which equals lnk. Therefore, k = exp(-1.3065) k = 0.241.
The literature 2 found the rate constant to be 0.0194 that is dramatically lower than that of the calculated value. This could be explained due to error or more possible a few anomaly results in the calculation that has dramatically effect the result. 2 Beach S.F.; Hepworth J.D.; Mason D; Swarbrick E.A.; Dyes and Pigments, 42 (1991) 71-77 3 Ritchie C.D.; Skinner G.A.; Badding V.G., Journal American Chemical Society, 89 (1967) 2063.
CaCl 2: the values in the table below (table 7) show the required data needed for the use of the kinetic salt effect equation:
CaCl 2:
The graph below (fig 5) shows this data plotted and the resulting line of best fit allowing the gradient to be calculated:
The graph results in a gradient of -0.7267. Therefore, 2A is constant, therefore Z AZ B is negative, this means that must have a different sign, which in turn indicates that adding the inert salt CaCl 2 causes the rate of the reaction to decrease. The literature 1 values for varying CaCl 2 show the rate decreasing with increasing ionic strength that agrees with the calculated results.
Turgeon J.C.; LaMer V.K., Journal American Chemical Society, 74 (1952) 5988.
KNO 3: the values in the table below (table 8) show the required data needed for the use of the kinetic salt effect equation for.
KNO 3:
The graph below (fig 6) shows this data plotted and the resulting line of best fit allowing the gradient to be calculated:
The graph results in a gradient of -0.5377. Therefore, 2A is constant, therefore Z AZ B is negative, this means that must have a different sign, which in turn indicates that adding the inert salt KNO 3 causes the rate of the reaction to decrease. The literature 1 values for varying KNO 3 show the rate decreasing with increasing ionic strength that agrees with the calculated results.
The results for the order of the reaction with respect to the concentration of OH- was found to be first odrer which was confirmed from the literature value obtained. The rate constant calculated was inaccurate compared to a literature value, this may have come about from some experimental errors. One source of these errors may have been from the varying concentration and varying ionic strength experiments. As the solutions used in these two experiments were not placed in a water bath to obtain a steady temperature throughout the experiment and in doing so may have caused errors in the result. This error may come out more in the calculation of the rate constant as this requires a high degree of accuracy to obtain an accurate result.
The activation energy of the reaction of 57.69 kJ mol -1 was accurate when compared to a literature value as it was only ~8 kJmol -1 too low. Also the effect of ionic strength on the rate of the reaction showed that with increasing the ionic strength the rate of reaction decreased for both of the inert salts used. This again was confirmed from a literature value. [5] L. Garci a-Rio,, J. R. Leis, J. C. Mejuto, Langmuir 20 (2004) 606-613.
