Max Weber is one of the greatest thinkers and precursors of our age for his complete examination and diagnosis of modernity, the modern life, and the modern personality shaped and invoked in this new epoch. However, Weber would decline any attempt to categorize him as a philosopher. He labeled his works humbly and self-consciously under the name of sociology and national economy and advocated specialization in one 's own vocation. Weber has left us with voluminous works covering various spheres of human life, but most of them remained fragmented and seemed to be lack of clear consistency with each other.
In his essays of methodology, Weber emphasizes the distinction between empirical knowledge observation and value judgment, and adheres to the principle of "value neutrality" in social science, which invites many critiques. Weber is thus often called as "a nihilist, a relativist, and a decisionist". (Schluchter, 1979: 59) These critiques are reasonable to some extent, but they have all ignored the background in which modern science is located: the disenchantment and rationalization of the world, which serve to be the central theme of Weber 's whole works.
This essay attempts to explore the interconnection of Weber 's methodology and his religious studies. In doing this, we can find a clue to the understanding of "value-neutrality" in the context of disenchantment of the world. The first section will draw on three essays on methodology, Value-judgment in Social Science, "Objectivity" in Social Science and Social Policy, Science as a Vocation. The critique of Leo Strauss will also be included and examined.
The next section will return to Weber 's religions study to explore the dialectical relation between religion and science through a brief account of Weber 's historical and comparative research of world religions. I will show that Weber 's religious study is central and consistent with his methodology. In other words, a dimension of religion needs to be considered to better understand the condition under which Weber develops his theory of value neutrality and science of culture.
In the third section, I will compare and contrast Kant and Weber in order to point out Weber 's idea does not come from nowhere. He is the last man of Enlightenment, standing at the end of the great tradition. He does not merely mourn the passing away of the old God, but provides the remedy to the culture crisis in his own way. "What should we do? How should we live?" These Tolstoyian questions are then addressed in the final section. In this disenchanted world, how should we adapt our life? What kind of person we are going to be? By answering these questions, I will argue that Weber is not a nihilist. His whole works, instead, set out to deal with and overcome the paradox of modernity and to rebuild science on "objective" bases.
Value-judgment is defined as "the 'practical' evaluations of a phenomenon which is capable of being influenced by our actions as worthy of either condemnation or approved", "whether based on ethical standards, cultural ideals or some other kind of 'world view'" (Weber, 1978: 69).
In Value-judgment in Social Science, Weber criticizes von Schomoller 's "admission of value-judgments into teaching," though he could "perfectly well understand this, as an echo of a great age which he and his friends helped to create." (1978: 71) Weber argues that teachers should resist the temptation of being "professional prophecy" (1978: 72) to preach their personal value judgments in the lectures. Likewise, university should not be "a priests' seminary" either. (1978: 74).
Weber insists upon the clear-cut distinction between logically demonstrable or empirically observable fact and practical value-judgment (1978: 70), which means in practice "all that an empirical discipline with the means at its disposal can show is (i) the unavoidable means; (ii) the unavoidable side-effects; (iii) the resulting conflict of several possible value-judgments with each other in their practical consequences." (1978: 85) Neither could normative rules be grounded in the observation data of human life, nor could we foresee the human history or destiny from the moral laws. Descriptive and normative knowledge belong to distinct spheres of human life and thus they need to be kept separated.
In "Objectivity" in Social Science and Social Policy, Weber has restated the restricted realm of science as the "analytical ordering of empirical reality" (1949: 54). Here, he assigns another function to science: it can also "judge" value-judgment critically. "The criticism can of course have only a dialectical character, i.e., it can be no more than a formal logical judgment of historically given value-judgments and ideas, a testing of the ideals according to the postulate of the internal consistency of the desired end." (1949: 54).
What does he mean by the critical judgment of value-judgment? It is a new discipline which Weber founded and developed in the name of science of culture, or social science:
Social science, in Weber 's definition, is distinct both from natural science and from "those which involved 'absolute' ethics and teleological philosophies of history."(Turner and Factor, 1984: 39) On the one side, social science differs from philosophical disciplines, in that the former, as we have discussed above, refrains from any attempt of value-judgment; while the latter, "by means of reasoning the 'meaning' of the value-judgments, and their ultimate structure and consequences from the point of view of meaning: in this way they can assign them their 'place' within the totality of possible 'ultimate' values and mark out their spheres of application from the point of view of meaning. (Weber, 1978: 85).
On the other hand, Weber does not have the ambition to "build a social science similar to physics in precision, scope, and utility."(Wrong, 1970: 8) The subject matter of social science is social-economic data (Weber, 1949: 63), but these data are not absolute "objective", for they are "conditioned by the orientation of our cognitive needs, as it arises from the specific cultural significance which we attribute to the particular event in a given case." (Weber, 1949: 64) In other words, human 's cognitive capacity is always inadequate compared to the infinite knowledge of the world. In dealing with the infinity, natural science confines its attention on the general and repeatable, while social science selects from the infinite only "those which interests us, which are related to human values." (Aron, 1970: 77) Social science "involves  'subjective' presuppositions insofar as it concerns itself only with those components of reality which have some relationship, however indirect, to events to which we attach cultural significance". (Weber, 1949: 82).
Therefore, "Objectivity" in the quotation mark, signifies that.
Instead of "retreating to pure scientificity, social science takes into account the extra-scientific standards within scientific judgment". It is not the "elimination of guiding 'value ideas' and interest, but their objectivation, so as to provide a basis for us to distance ourselves from them". (L  with, 1993: 53).
Weber does not stop at the discussion of the relation between cultural significance and objectivity of social science. He further develops that the concept of culture, as a value-concept (Weber, 1949), is comprised of "different value systems of the world stand in conflict with each other." (Weber, 1989: 22) "John Stuart Mill, once said that, simply on the basis of experience, no one would ever arrive at the existence of one God   and, it seems to me, certainly not a God of goodness   but at polytheism."(Weber, 1994: 78).
Any attempt to achieve scientific "objectivity" by balancing the various value-judgments against each other is bound to fail, as it is a battle between God and Devil. Weber provides two examples here to shed light on the irreconcilable conflicts: how could we compare a devout Catholic and a freemason on the same level? Is it possible to decide "scientifically" between the value of France and Germany? The conflicts not only happen between various value-spheres and world views, but also within one particular world view. Neither of them is more rational or more legitimate than the other. Weber gives his explanation: "Destiny, certainly not  'science' prevails over these gods and their struggles" (Weber, 1989: 23), because science itself is just one of these world views. Therefore, science should restrict itself to the following uses in the practical and personal "life": (1) techniques to control the external things and people 's behavior through calculation; (2) methods of thoughts and tools; (3) clarity, which makes clear such-and such means in order to carry out one 's belief in practice. (Weber, 1989: 25-6) Science should by no means transcend the boundary between value-judgment and logical deduction.
Weber 's claim of value neutrality and impossibility of reconciling different value-spheres has invited lots of critiques from his contemporaries and those of our own age. He is often depicted as (a) value relativist, "values are on a footing of equality of their validity"; (b) value antagonist, values are in conflict with each other"; and (c) value decisionist, since there are no rational bases grounds for making choices, but irrational. (Lenhardt, 1994: 37).
Leo Strauss is one of the most important critics of Weber 's theory of value. As a natural right theorist, he argues natural law is the highest moral principle, upon which social and political forms are to be based. And moral law could be grasped or discovered by the faculty of human reason. Strauss "terms 'natural right': the right of the wise (the philosophy) to use the highest form of human knowledge (philosophy/science) to discover the natural and superior form of right or good for 'man'". (Gane, 2002: 38).
Strauss 's version of science could be equalized with reason, which is prescriptive and descriptive at the same time, for it is used to confer 'ought' on the basis of what 'is', by nature. It could never be value-free, "for it is to be employed to establish a 'natural' value-standard according to which values may be ranked", and prevails and transcends all the opposing value positions. (Gane, 2002: 39).
By contrast, a closed system of general values with a well-ordered hierarchy of values for Weber is impossible. For Weber, it is not only the issue of value differences, but also of value collision and conflict, which could not be reconciled by any rational or empirical scientific procedure. (Schluchter, 1981: 16-7) What 's more, there is an unbridgeable gap between spheres of cognition and of evaluation. The "is" and "ought" could not be harmonized either.
The critique of Strauss is reasonable to the extent that he shows Weber 's deliberate refusal to establish a substantial basis of value, but he does not ask the questions further: Why does Weber fail to find a secure foundation of value? What is the background of Weber 's theory of value? He somehow neglects the close link of Weber 's theory of value with Weber 's diagnosis of modernity. As Schluchter commented, "Weber has been called a nihilist, a relativist, and a decisionist. He is all of these things if you believe in the existence and discernibility of an objective meaning of the world."(1979, 58-9).
In the previous section, we have explored Weber 's methodology, his theory of value neutrality, "objectivity" of social science. We have also discussed Strauss 's critique of Weber. In this section, I will attempt to show Weber 's methodology is based on his diagnosis of modernity.
The relation between religion and science is one of the key themes of the Enlightenment. One dominant interpretation held by people during the Enlightenment is that the whole human history could be viewed as a progress of science over myth, mystery, magic. Religion is believed to be one of biggest myths at that time, standing in the radical opposition to science. Enlightenment applauds science 's gaining predominance over the religion, with the latter retreating into the private sphere of people 's life.
Weber 's historical and comparative study of world religions provides an alternative interpretation of relation between science, rationalism and religion. Firstly, it should be born in mind, "Weber wants to compare the world religions in their individuality and to refrain from arranging them in a sequence". (Schluchter, 1981: 3) This is also consistent with his methodology of value neutrality. Each world view has its own reason of being. They can not be reorganized into a hierarchical system with a teleological tendency towards a certain direction.
As we have mentioned above, Weber 's religious studies are not merely for their own sake, but are linked to disenchantment and rationalization of the world. Weber proposed two primary yardsticks to judge the level of rationalization of a religion: "one is the degree to which the religion has divested itself of magic; the other is the degree to which it has systematically united the relation between God and the world and therewith its own ethical relationship to the God". (Weber, 1964: 226) We will then explore the level of rationalization of the four following religions, Confucianism, Greek polytheism, Catholicism and Puritanism.
The legitimacy of equalizing Confucianism with religion is still dubious, but there is no denying that Confucianism to ancient China is like religion to west, which comprises a whole set of rules governing peoples' life and worldview. Weber argues, "the preservation of this magic garden, however, was one of the tendencies intimate to Confucian ethics." (1964: 227) "Men remain close to the gods through magic, ritual and the observance of taboos". (Schluchter, 1979: 22) The supreme and eternal behavior and life order is existent in this world, represented by wise people with perfect morality in the ancient times. Every one could become a "gentleman", the supreme personality in Confucianism, through learning the rituals, reading the classical texts, and following up the behaviors of the ancient wise men, which will be automatically accompanied by the good fortune in this world and a good name after death. There is no equivalent of the conception of "salvation" in Confucianism. "Confucianism rationalism leads away from the problem of salvation and aims at the 'maintenance of the magical garden'". (Schluchter, 1979: 25) The tension between nature and deity is absent in Confucian ethic. (Weber, 1964).
Ancient Greek polytheism could be seen as a unique interlude between an unfragmented cosmos in the primitive time and Judeo-Christianity of monotheism. Every Greek God is in charge of certain spheres of human life and accordingly has a specific function. "Just as Hellenic man sacrificed on this occasion to Aphrodite and on another to Apollo, and above all as everybody sacrificed to the gods of his city."(Weber, 1989: 23) "With the systematization of the idea of divinity and transformation of the subordinate magical realm of spirits in the direction of anthropomorphism, specialization, and hierarchy" (Schluchter, 1979: 24), human distanced himself by attributing the functions upon the Gods and then became confronted with the conceptions outside them. In the case of Ancient Greek, science is not necessarily opposed to religion. On the contrary, religion is the first attempt of rationalization of the cosmos, upon which science is developed.
The monotheism in the Judeo-Christian tradition further rationalizes the world and expands the gap between "a postulated divine perfection and the imperfection of the 'world'... It tears apart the magic unity of event and meaning, produces a tension-ridden dualism, and thus also destroys the 'primeval immediacy of man 's relation to the world.'" (Schluchter, 1979: 27-8) But the tension is compromised by the institutions of churches in the daily life of ordinary people. Some "religious most highly qualified individuals", who represent the whole mankind, leave the world and retreat into special religious communities. Those non-religious people therefore can still carry on their worldly business.
The rationalization of religion culminates finally in Puritanism, especially in Calvinism. Not only does Puritanism "condemn all magical means of salvation as superstition and blasphemy" (Schluchter, 1979: 40), it also destroys all intermediary agencies between God and man. Everyone is standing directly to the God alone. This world is everywhere imperfect, worthless and inferior. In Weber 's description,.
However, Calvinism does not lead to world rejection, but on the contrary to world mastery. Weber explains that Calvinists believe the chance of salvation is related to their success in this world. In order to prove the particularism of grace, they are motivated to hard work, which is not for the material enjoyment, but for its own sake. "In the name of God you must control yourself and dominate the 'world' through your vocation." The paradoxical thing is the "religiously devalued 'world' forces those who would control it to recognize its own laws; and the more this happens, the more independent the 'world' becomes". (Schluchter, 1979: 42).
Science as a study of laws in this world serves a useful helper to control the world through rational calculation. It became more and more a sphere of autonomy with the waning of the religious passion, and finally got rid of the control of religion entirely. It is like after walking a long way, a person finally forgot where his starting point is. What 's more, religious world view became increasingly conflicted with scientific rationality and is condemned by the latter to be entirely false, irrational, which could only survive in the private sphere of human life.
Schluchter identifies two world views: monistic and dualistic. The former could be represented by Confucianism, and the latter by Calvinism. The Greek polytheism and Catholicism are somewhere in the middle. In the monistic magic world view, there is no unbridgeable gap between this world and the world behind. They are linked together through symbolic interaction. "The natural processes not only happen but also have an intrinsic meaning". (Schluchter, 1979: 22) Therefore, there is much overlap between empirical knowledge and world interpretation, between magic science and magic ethics. On the contrary, in the dualistic world view, "relations between scientific rationalism and ethico-religious rationalism can become tense."(Schluchter, 1979: 45) The result is that science becomes increasingly independent of religious control and at the same time loses its raison d'etre. This is the cultural crisis since the death of God heralded by Nietzsche for the first time, which is echoed in Weber 's comparative study of world religions.
Science which interprets itself monistically is not the antithesis of religion   it is itself a religion. It not only proceeds from the conviction that science rationality in the disenchanted world is the "only possible form of rational world interpretation", but also presupposes that it can decipher the objective meaning of the world. On this score science as religion follows the Christian path   it continues working on the Great Illusion. It contributes to the obfuscation of the tremendously difficult problems of living in the disenchanted world. The vocation of science as religion is mystification, not enlightenment. (Schluchter, 1979: 50).
Now we could better understand the role of science in the disenchanted world after the discussion of the relation between religion and science. Weber 's establishment of science of culture should be seen as an effort to lead science out of the predicament and to base it upon a substantial basis, which is realized through the clear distinction between logical deduction and value-judgment. Science could tell us nothing about the meaning of our life because of its disconnection with religion. What 's more, science upon emancipation joins in breaking down of the transcendent order and law which used to belong to religion.
Let 's us take a second look at Strauss 's critique of Weber 's theory of value-neutrality. Strauss insists that "right" could be derived from intrinsic properties or "nature" of things. There are no boundaries between the human reason and natural order. Value conflict, the ongoing wars between Gods of different value spheres, is what Strauss called a "warrior ethic" in the value hierarchy. In his eyes, it is inferior to the supreme ethic, in his term, natural law, which stands above and transcends all the conflicting values. The conflict between modern value-spheres can be resolved through reference to a natural law. Viewed from Weber, it is "abstract and utopian in character, and more worryingly, lies open to systematic abuse", which may give rise to new means of domination. (Gane, 2002: 39) Re-enchantment or retreat to the ancient mythical and religious faith, for Weber, is doomed to fail. He predicted pessimistically,.
Weber has "emphasized time and again that his remarks did not imply any decision in matters of epistemology, philosophy of history and value history". His philosophical studies are fragmented and unsystematic, and only occupy a small faction of Weber 's whole works. Even though, after we have discussed Weber 's methodology and religious studies, we could find many similarities between Weber and his predecessors. In this section, we will make a brief comparison between Kant and Weber and try to find their intellectual relation, in order to locate Weber in the long tradition of Enlightenment.
Such a comparison is legitimate as Ringer has pointed out the logical distinction between theoretical and practical reasoning, descriptive and prescriptive, is and ought, is the conceptual core of Weber 's case for value neutrality, which is under the influence of Kant 's theory of ethics. (2000: 134).
Kant 's three critiques aimed at tackling with the cultural crisis at his time. Neither did he share the optimistic attitude toward the complete triumph of human reason with those rationalists of his time, nor did he agree with David Hume 's skepticism, who believed "Reason is, and ought only to be, the slave of the passions". "Kant 's objective in the Critique of Pure Reason was not to affirm an idealist metaphysics, but to ground natural science by refuting skepticism". (Lenhardt, 1994: 26) He dispelled God out of the logical deduction in the first critique, but in his second critique, Critique of Practical Reason, "he reintroduced the idea of God that he had seemly refuted in the first Critique". He argued that "God, the universe, the soul   these all have in common that they are not phenomena, but things in themselves which are unknowable while at the same time having a 'regulative' character." Without their existence, "man who intends to follow the dictates of the moral law is unable to realize them by themselves". (Lenhardt, 1994: 26-8).
The incompatibilities between the rational metaphysics and the moral theology were compromised by Kant, but not truly solved. The cleavage between the realm of cognitive certainty and morality was opened up by Kant and was never healed. The whole project of Enlightenment ends in the complete triumph of human reason or in other words, with religion 's retreat from the central stage of history, which is the intellectual background for the emergence of Weber, his theory of value neutrality, science of culture, etc.
To some extent, Weber 's sociology of religion could be seen as a final response to the decline of the influence of religion, though his is "certainly not an analysis of the claims to validity". (Lenhardt, 1994: 27) It 's the differences in their historical background and accordingly the attitudes toward religion, which led to different answers they provided. For Kant, he is able to establish an unconditionally absolute moral philosophy on the basis of the existence of the God. By contrast, in Weber 's time, the ethico-religious metaphysics had already surrendered to rationality and at this point, science of culture or social science is the alternative way provided by Weber to reestablish the "objectivity" of science, just as Kant re-grounded reason in a secure position.
In conclusion, Weber 's study of religion, his methodology of social science and his other works do not come from nowhere. He is the last man of the great tradition of Enlightenment. The initial theme of his works is still the relation between God and man, but in Weber 's time, the heroic age has passed away, the old God and world has fallen down irretrievably before him. His question is therefore distinct from his predecessor, how could we live in this new world?.
In the previous sections, we have talked about, according to Weber, in this disenchanted and rationalized world, the universal and supreme law has collapsed with the declining power of religion. Instead of a godless world, "today there is the religious nature of 'everyday life.' The many gods of old, without their magic and therefore in the form of impersonal forces, rise up from their graves, strive for power over our lives and begin once more their eternal struggle among themselves." (Weber, 1989: 23).
Science today is unable to answer to the ultimate question of life. "What should we do? How should we live?".
Therefore, the question still remains unsolved: In such a world of warring Gods, how should we derive the meaning of life? Weber 's discussion about the role of teacher in the lecture room may shed some light here. His model of teacher is required:
The new personality suitable for this new world of warring gods in everyday life could be drawn in an analogous way. (1) The new personality is a specialized expert in his specific "vocation," which is in radical opposition to the model of Renaissance, a universal well-rounded man. (2) The person of "hero ethic", inwardly strong enough to mediate the everyday conflicts of values. He is obliged to be "relentlessly candid with respect to the ultimate reasons behind one 's own desires and actions" and at the same time be conscious of the intractability of value-conflicts, which require the realization of ideals only at the cost of other ideals. (Mommsen, 1989: 135-136) (3) Instead of expressing his "personal loves and hatreds" (Weber, 1978: 73), the personality devotes and subjects himself to one of the conflicting values. The judgment is not based on reason and obedience to reason 's law. Rather, it is "developed in the  'struggle against the difficulties of life'...to judge the validity of such values is a matter of belief". (Goldman, 1998: 143).
Weber is fully aware that in this disenchanted world, Kant 's universal moral imperative could no longer apply. Weber 's model of new personality, at this point, though not a thorough one, provides an alternative remedy to the culture crisis.
This essay attempts to add a religious dimension to the analysis of Weber 's methodology of social science. It points out that Weber 's theory of value neutrality does not come from nowhere. Weber is the last man of Enlightenment and his science of culture is a remedy to the cultural crisis and an effort to reestablish science on a secure basis. Finally, in this disenchanted and rationalized world, a new personality is invoked by Weber, who is able to cope with the everyday conflicting value spheres by willingly subjecting oneself to one of those ultimate values.
