New Religious Movements took up great media and governmental concern towards the latter half of the twentieth century. From the 1970s onwards many of these new religious movements had being throughout the headlines due to their development and independent scandals. In particular a few key events such as the Jonestown massacre 1978 pushed the followers of these movements into the headlines. To consider what is meant by a 'new religious movement' perhaps the best definition is that of Barker. A new religious movement is religious because it loosely follows beliefs chiefly followed by religions such as life after death, and may possess a deity or prophecy like many religions, and new because it has arisen in the second half of the twentieth century.
Barker E. in Wilson B.R and Creswell J. 1999.:15.
Since many of these new religious movements have come into the public 's knowledge there has been widespread condemnation of the movements and their leaders. To such an extent that those groups which traditionally fall under the umbrella of new religious movements are now defined by most of the population and the press as 'cults'. However those groups which fall under the heading of new religious movements are so diverse that any generalisation applied to them will not be true of all the movements.
Barker E 1989: 10.
From the outset of the movements coming to the public 's attention there has been a strong connection between the movements themselves and those against them. As a response to these new religious movements a number of anti cult groups have arisen. In Britain two of the main groups which arose against new religious movements were FAIR a parents association which not only serves parents of cult members but had membership from religious pastors, ex cult members, journalists, and teachers. Another anti cult formed in this period was the Deo-Gloria Trust formed by a business man whose two sons had spent time in new religious movements. Because of the founders Christian connections the trust became closely linked to many Christian anti cult movements. The new religious movements have also prompted a backlash by psychiatrists in particular scientology that sees one of its main roles to rid the world of the influence of psychology. Due to this backlash from psychiatry the new religious movements have often been accused of brainwashing their followers and using other psychiatric tools against them. The new religious movements also pose controversial towards the medical industry. Many people believe that scientology claims to act as a form of medical healing but does not possess a license. Scientology is certainly the main of these religions which claims to possess medical healing, various raids on scientology premises in the late 1970s led to the confiscation of many of the Scientologists auditing meters.
Beckford.1985:225.
Ibid: 227.
One of the other reasons for the controversy surrounding new religious movements is the role the media plays. Despite the media coverage few people have direct contact with a new religious movement. New religious movements can be unwilling to give views to the media, largely because of the bias against them which exists in the press. Due to this most people knowledge of new religious movements comes through the media, or in more recent times the internet. The internet however cannot be trusted to give accurate information as often dummy sites are created by those people against new religious movements claiming false beliefs; the idea is to give these movements bad publicity. The role of the anti movements is to make the movements seem as threatening to everyday people. Those movements against the new religious movements aim to construct the movements as devious; this is done through a variety of ways. The media is one of the key ways of doing this, the press construct these movements to make it appear that potentially everyone is in danger from them.
Beckford. 1999 in Wilson and Creswell 1999: 103.
The narratives formed in the press also cement the new religious movements as controversial or dangerous within the public 's mindset. This was perhaps most evident within the press' response to the Davidian movement during the Waco siege. The press used images and film from past cult movements such as Jonestown to remind the public of the cult narrative and so set the Davidians in the public mindset as dangerous and disturbed. This reconstruction of the cult narrative becomes so intense that even the labelling of a group as a cult is attached to so many negative connotations the public instantly views the group as a threat. Perhaps the strongest evidence to support this is the work of Beckford and Cole who conducted a public opinion survey in Washington DC following Jonestown on the opinion on cults. Over 25% of the people interviewed displayed negative views towards a  'spoof cult' invented by the interviewers.
Jones C & Baker G in Lewis J (ed) 1994 :150.
Beckford & Cole 1988 :209:225.
One of the key arguments against many religions by rationalists is that religion causes violence and so if religion was to decline there would be less social conflict. Where as violence in religion is often constructed through wars and social conflict. Violence within new religious movements often takes different forms. For example in the case of the Waco tragedy violence was between the religion and the state. However new religious movements are also often constructed as violent towards their own members in the case of Jonestown and Heavens gate, these religions have required death from their followers. Whilst many of the followers believed this was for the religion critics have used these examples to support new religious movements as dangerous and potentially violent. Another way new religious movements have been constructed as violent is through direct action Scientology is perhaps one of the best examples of this as it has encouraged its followers to attack works by psychologists, and promoted hate campaigns against other new religious movements. Scientology directly supports the persecution of anybody not following their beliefs this is often directed at psychologists due to the direct confrontation between the two groups.
Beckford. 1999. in Wilson and Creswell 1999: 103.
Another way these new religions have been constructed as controversial is through the idea of brainwashing. This is often propagated throughout the media and is one of the key themes apostates of these new religious movements often depict when being interviewed. The idea behind this is that these religions prey on young minds that have no history of religious following or what is required from religious belief. Once committed to the religion many of these followers submit all their time towards their new beliefs. This can involve the splitting up or the loosing of contact with family. It is through this brainwashing dichotomy that many of the family groups against new religions operate. The view widely publicised by the government and the media is that these individuals cannot have made the rational choice to join these organisations therefore they must have been brainwashed in some way.
Barker 1989 :40.
The view of these new religions as brainwashing and kidnapping innocent people to become their followers is closely linked to the link with many of these new religious movements and xenophobia. In particular many of the movements which arrived in the 1970s were closely linked to Asian philosophies for example the unification church or the 'moonies' as it became known was created by Sun Myung Moon from Korea and drew on Buddhist teaching. Scientology also includes a basis from Buddhism and Hinduism. This foreign nature was seen as threatening too many people in the West who viewed these new religious movements as deeply suspicious. New religious movements have however always been constructed as dangerous and suspicious. Movements which receive widespread acceptance today such as the Salvation Army and Jehovah witnesses where regarded with fear and mistrust when founded.
Ibid :42.
In many ways as the new religious movements have gained popularity and celebrity followers they have become more controversial. The media have publicised stories of fraud and exploitation from these movements so within the public narrative these new religious movements are becoming closer to the world of politics or business than religion. There has also been a wide publication of how these movements have exploited their followers particularly financially. As the leaders of the movements appear to be getting richer apostates are leaving the movements telling stories of lost inheritances and jobs as they have poured their life into serving the movement. In 'exposing' new religious movements the critics are attempting to remove the label 'religious'. For example many people claim that movements like Scientology are exploiting their status as a religion to gain tax benefits when really they are more like a company.
To the journalist the new religious movement is ideal for creating controversy. The unknown element as well as the science fiction connections many of the movements have means they easily create scandalous stories and can be constructed as a public threat. 'Atrocity tales' of the evils of cults attract readers. However these movements are only interesting to the journalists when conflict is involved which means that much that gets portrayed to the public is of a scandalous nature. Bainbridge contrasts this view of the media with that of researchers who are more likely to research a movement which does n't involve scandal or after the scandal is gone. This creates a much wider view of religious movements but one which the public will rarely see. Unfortunately for the new religious movements the anti cult movements have a close relationship with the government and the journalists so even when objectivity is aimed at, the bias is usually clear in the articles construction.
Barker 1989: 39.
Bainbridge in Wilson and Creswell 1999: 113.
The role of new religious communities is seen as especially problematic in the US where there has been a history of suspicion towards communities living outside society. This is also linked to the strength of many 'traditional' religions such as Christianity and Judaism within the US. Many of these new religious movements have special tax privileges because of their religious status; and the idea that many of their followers are quitting their jobs to devote themselves to these movements poses a threat to the government. This is mirrored in France where many religious movements are seen as a security threat by the government, and are under surveillance.
Beckford in Wilson and Creswell 1999:103.
The position of the leaders within these new religious movements is also seen as controversial. The leaders are often descried as charismatic and usually the subject of media attacks. One of the reasons for the focus on the leaders of these movements is because as in the case of Jonestown it is often the leaders who are seen as responsible when tragedies occur. Within a religious organisation these leaders can have great control over their followers, in some situations the leaders words can pronounce every aspect of somebody 's life. However not all the leaders of these religions use their authority to control their followers and not all the followers consistently follow the leaders, many will happily disobey commands they consider foolish or excessive.
Barker 1999: 16.
Ibid.
The new religious movements can be considered controversial in many ways. For most it is the existence of something which does not conform to the norm which arouses suspicion. The existence of charismatic leaders, and the reported contact with religious movements give the public a perception of something which is violent, a possible threat to themselves and society as a whole, in some ways foreign and preying on those most susceptible and crucially preying on those people who are key to society the young and the educated. The controversy surrounding new religious movements cannot be examined without looking at the role of the media, the media is how people gain their information about such movements and so ultimately how the power over the publics perceptions. Many scare stories are published in the media around new religious movements which only increases their controversy.
The other main factor for the spread of the controversial information about new religious movements is the spread of the anti cult movements, these movements are usually strongly connected to the government and the media and so chiefly control what the public knows about new religious movements. The combination of the media and the anti cult groups has successfully created a collective narrative for all religious movements as threatening and corruptive. It is because of this collective narrative of 'cults' that what makes one new religious movement controversial ultimately is applied to all religious movements whether similar or not.
