In order to explain and predict economic reality, many have sought an understanding of the basic unit of analysis, the individual, and what it is that motivates human behaviour. In economic theory, human actions have often been reduced to one motive, expressed by Edgeworth in 1881: "the first principle of Economics is that every agent is actuated only by self-interest." A rational, self-interested individual is assumed to have the objective of maximizing the expected value of her own payoff. She is assumed to have a consistent preference ordering, often assumed to be in terms of material consumption. The value of the payoff is measured on a utility scale. Some Chicago school economists such as George Stigler understand the founding father of economics, Adam Smith, to have constructed his economic theory on the 'granite' foundations of self-interest being the sole motive for human action. Therefore, Smith is seen as the prime forerunner of neo-classicism. But was self-interest really the only motivation for human action that Smith recognized? In this essay, I will argue that Smith recognized a variety of co-existing motives and determinants for human action, including sympathy, approbation, the impartial spectator and norms. This has important implications for the philosophical foundations of neo-classical economic theory, and challenges the idea that we can use an abstraction of self-interest as the sole motive for human action to conduct relevant and reasonable economic analysis.
F. Y. Edgeworth cited in Amartya Sen, "Rational Fools: A Critique of the Behavioural Foundations of Economic Theory", Philosophy and Public Affairs, 6 (1977), p. 317.
Mark Casson, "Introduction", in Mark Casson, ed., Culture, Social Norms and Economics, vol. 1 (Cheltenham: Elgar Publishing, 1997), p. xiii.
Amartya Sen, "The Formulation of Rational Choice", The American Economic Review, (2) 1994, p. 385.
Knud Haakonssen and Donald Winch, "The Legacy of Adam Smith", in Knud Haakonssen, ed., The Cambridge Companion to Adam Smith, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006), p. 373.
First, what does Smithian self-love mean? Smith caricatures self-love as the "regard to our own private happiness and interest." By far his most famous work is The Wealth of Nations, in which a regard to our own interest is what makes a self-regulating economy possible. As rational individuals pursue their own fixed economic desires (often for material gains), their actions are guided by an invisible hand and result in social welfare. But this narrow selfishness is something Smith attacks throughout The Theory of Moral Sentiments. He is rather ambiguous about defining what self-love actually is. He implicitly differentiates between egoistic selfishness and virtuous self-love, what I will call 'enlightened self-love.' In the end, enlightened Smithian self-love means maximizing the doing of good things and gaining approval from the impartial spectator and society. Individuals do not seek to maximize their individual utility, but can also act out of sympathy with others, or out of a sense of duty.
Adam Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments, 6th ed. (London: A. Millar, 1790). Available online at The Library of Economics and Liberty, . Accessed 20/04/07. The numbers refer to part, section and paragraph. VII.II.87.
Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, Edwin Cannan (ed.) 5th ed., (London: Methuen and Co., 1904). Available online at "The Library of Economics and Liberty", . Accessed 20/04/07. The citation numbers refer to part, section and paragraph. IV.2.9.
Before I proceed, it will be useful for this essay to point out the (non-neoclassical) idea that there are three levels of human behaviour, that of biological man (concerned with survival and simpler pleasure-satisfaction), social man (concerned with gaining status and respect from others) and ethical man (concerned with self-respect and praise-worthiness). Neo-classical economic man is primarily a biological man operating in isolation from others, whereas Smith 's economic man is motivated by pleasures, his relation to others and being moral.
Mark Casson, "Introduction", pp xxiii-xxviii.
Smith recognized that sympathetic interaction has an enormous influence on human motivation. Smithian sympathy is what we today refer to as empathy; the capacity to imagine oneself' in someone else 's shoes and have fellow-feeling with whatever they feel. Sympathy is the basis for social life and at the heart of Smith 's entire theory of human behaviour. For Smith, we are by nature social animals and our interactive sociability constantly negotiates our own interests with those of others. Our own identity and feelings are tied up with others. Smith explicitly attacks those who "are fond of deducing all our sentiments from certain refinements of self-love." Sympathy is fundamentally different from self-love, it "cannot, in any sense, be regarded as a selfish principle." It means an imaginative consideration of others' interests and a judgment that they are important. Sympathizing with another individual motivates or alters our actions when we interact. This is much unlike Pareto-optimal situations in microeconomics where it is not suggested that the individual can change their view of what they want to do after interactions with others. For Smith, interaction can and does alter our behaviour through sympathy, and therefore we cannot have well-defined utility curves. It is only after interaction with others that choices can be determined, which means that we cannot have a constant preference ordering. Our sympathy with each other prevents motives that are only geared at consumption of goods and services. The economy cannot be understood just in terms of consumers choosing consumption bundles of goods. Thus, in any context where we interact with others - including the market - our actions and motives are other-directed as much as selfish.
Adam Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments, I.I.5.
Carola von Villiez, "Smith and Rawls," in Leonidas Montes and Eric Schliesser, eds., New Voices on Adam Smith, (London: Routledge, 2006), p. 116.
Adam Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments, I.I.14.
Adam Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments, VII.III.7.
Mark Casson, "Introduction", p. xiii.
E. L. Khalil, "Beyond Self-Interest and Altruism: A Reconstruction of Adam Smith 's Theory of Human Conduct", Economics and Philosophy, 2 (1990), pp. 170-82.
Seeking status and approval is another fundamental motivation, which stems from individuals' capacity to sympathize with each others' situations. There are numerous indications in Smith 's work that the desire for approbation is an underlying motivation for all human actions. For example, he writes that the desire to be respected "is, perhaps, the strongest of all our desires" and that "place [...] is the end of half the labours of human life." This desire - like the continuous process of sympathy - lie outside the realm of narrow egoism. Humans are motivated by their standing in social relations, not their desire for goods (when our basic needs are satisfied). Smith makes the acute observation that humans often equate wealth with status and therefore pursue riches. Interestingly, the founding father of economics constructs the desire for material consumption around the notion of humans being duped. Pursuing wealth is a gigantic self-deception. Smith argues that real happiness lies in tranquillity of the mind. It seems that 'true' self-love would be directed at this kind of private happiness, not wealth. It is the false, deceptive idea that wealth leads to happiness that is the economic motive that drives the narrowly self-interested individuals. This deception is well, though, because Smith believes that it keeps in motion the whole "industry of mankind.".
Adam Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments, VI.I.4.
Ibid, I.III.23.
Willie Henderson, Evaluating Adam Smith: Creating the Wealth of Nations, (London: Routledge, 2006), p. 60.
Adam Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments, IV.I.10.
Ibid, III.I.72.
Ibid, IV.I.10.
That the search for approbation and status motivates much of human actions, and that the pursuit of riches is a human delusion, has important implications for contemporary mainstream economics. I will discuss three of these. Firstly, it is important to note that Smith views status as one 's position in society, something one is, for example a land-lord. It is the long-term goal of 'becoming someone' that drives humans. Even though he does not make it explicit, there is also an implied motive in the short-run, namely status in terms of one does. Smith recognizes that in sympathetic interactions, we always try to influence and convince each other. Human beings are social animals and like all social animals, we are also pecking-order animals that establish hierarchies. Frans de Waal has studied chimpanzee communities for years, and has observed constant status transactions in daily life amongst one of our closest related primates. Perhaps the constant communication of status is a result of evolution and so wide-spread that it must factor into economic agents' decisions. Every time we interact with others, we are weary of our power-relation and try to gain status. Again, we see that preferences must be multilayered, there are a lot of social motives that factor into making economic decisions. We cannot reduce social man to economic man without loosing sight of a lot of economic reality.
Ibid, VII.III.7.
Frans de Waal, Chimpanzee Politics: Power and Sex Among Apes, (London: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1998).
Secondly, we begin to see that in parallel with Smith 's theory of human motivation, he also offers a critique of some features of the current capitalistic system. Today, the results of the 'industry of mankind' are much less desirable than they were in his times. We are realizing that the earth 's resources are limited and that our forms of production and consumption are putting severe strains on our habitat. In micro-economics, well-behaved preferences are monotonic, which means that more of a good is always better. Smith would say that as long as our stomachs are full, a preference for more consumption is a deception not necessarily 'well-behaved'. The question is: if motivation for material gain is the result of deception and our consumption society is inherently self-destructive, ought economists not tackle this deception instead of building their theories around the idea that narrow egoism is the only motive for human action?.
Hal R. Varian, Intermediate Microeconomics: A Modern Approach, 7th ed., (New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 2006), p. 45.
Adam Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments, IV.I.10.
Thirdly, Smith 's view of what drives humans suggests that we serve our self-interest by earning social esteem. What the rational agent wants to maximize is the approval they gain from society, not their material gains (even though they might gain approval by being rich). This indeed is consistent with the rationality principle, and only questions the narrowness of assuming that rational action is directed towards selfish and materialistic ends.
Mark Casson, "Introduction", p. xiii.
Clearly, social motives to gain respect from others play an important role in Smith 's theory of human action and suggests that an enlightened self-love concerns the agent 's relationships with others. Smith goes even further and suggests that enlightened self-love is also motivated by a desire for self-respect. Smith thought there were three stages in the life of man: the life of pleasure, the life of emulation and the life of virtue. Seeking pleasures, riches and approval of others correspond to the first two stages. But importantly, Smith recognized a third level of motivations beyond the biological and the social: the moral level. What guides behaviour here is the impartial spectator. The impartial spectator is a hypothetical third-person spectator who judges the rightness and wrongness of actions around him, both of others and of oneself. It is the fair and impartial "tribunal within our breast" that guides all behaviour. Smith writes that to act according to the preferences of the impartial spectator is the object "which is what of all things... [a person] has the greatest desire to do." It seems we have an even more fundamental motive than seeking approbation and that is to seek self-respect and dignity, to be virtuous and fair.
Ralph J. Lindgren, The Social Philosophy of Adam Smith, (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1973), p. 40.
Adam Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments, III.I.39.
Ibid, II.II.11.
This challenges the view that holds that economics, as a body of knowledge, is independent of ethics. The value of self-respect and morality lies outside monetary valuations and the standard utility function, yet is an important part of human motivation. Smith believed that human beings do not act mechanically but can act purposefully to reach higher self-respect. Thus, already during the Scottish Enlightenment, there was an implicit recognition of higher order moral preferences. In recent times, Harry Frankfurt has argued that it is constitutive of personhood to have preferences over preferences - so called second order volitions - where the individual wants a certain desire to be her will. The parallels to Smith are plentiful. Both emphasize the difference between rationality and morality. Rationality is interpreted in terms of choosing the best available means to a given end, whereas morality concerns the end themselves. Agents are not simply instrumental utility-maximizers, they are also critical and self-evaluative and complex. Thus, we cannot concern ourselves merely with the means if we at all want to understand and predict human behaviour because human actions are also motivated by evaluation of the worthiness of the ends they pursue.
Daniel M. Hausman and Michael S. McPherson, Economic Analysis and Moral Philosophy, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), p. 214.
E. L. Khalil, "Beyond Self-Interest and Altruism: A Reconstruction of Adam Smith 's Theory of Human Conduct", p. l82.
Alan P. Hamlin, "Introduction", p. xix.
Harry G. Frankfurt, Freedom of the Will and the Concept of a Person", Journal of Philosophy, 1 (1971), pp. 5-20.
So far we have explored the individualist method that Smith employs to understand social and economic reality: where society is the product of individual self-interest, status and seeking approval and self-respect. Smith also employed a social method to understand human behaviour, where individuals are the product of society. According to Smith, we have to understand the economic culture if we are to understand human motivation. We cannot view economic man in abstraction from his social settings, unlike neo-classical theory where the cultural environment is taken as given. Economic theory should not restrict itself only to the problems of individual choice. It must also give a theory of the origins of that economic culture in which rational choices are made. For Smith, human motivation is dependent on personal upbringing, education, position in society, the society we live in, our job, the extent of division of labour and norms. One example is the norm of fairness which Smith paid due attention to. For example, he writes that in man 's race to increase personal wealth and status, "he may run as hard as he can" but he can never "justle" or "thrown down" his opponents because this "is a violation of fair play." We get the sense of fair play from an interactive learning process with others, and then these norms shape our behaviour, more so than instinctive pleasure/pain calculations of individual utility-maximization. The notion of fairness also stems from a level of self-command and restraint on behalf of each individual: we have to restrain our desire for acquisitiveness, so that we can act with propriety. This complex theory of human motivation where fairness and duty play a role would be better equipped than narrow egoism to answer the research in behavioural economics and evolutionary game theory on ultimatum games whose outcomes do not confirm the standard rational choice model.
Robert Boyden Lamb, "Adam Smith 's System: Sympathy not Self-Interest", Journal of the History of Ideas, 4 (1974), p. 671.
Peter Koslowski, "Introduction", in Peter Koslowski, ed., Contemporary Economic Ethics and Business Ethics, (New York: Springer, 2000), p. 8.
Ibid, p. 12.
Spencer J. Pack, Capitalism as a Moral System: Adam Smith 's Critique of the Free Market Economy, (Aldershot: Edward Elgar,1991), p. 88.
Adam Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments, II.II.11.
Matthew Watson, Foundations of International Political Economy, (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005), p. 115.
S. Abu Turab Rizvi, "Adam Smith 's Sympathy", p. 245.
For example, Camerer and Thaler have argued that the idea of "playing fair" is more important than self-interested gain calculations in strategic interactions, see S. Abu Turab Rizvi, "Adam Smith 's Sympathy", p. 246.
Thus, in concluding on Smith 's understanding of human action, we have seen that he recognizes that human motivation is highly complex and beyond mere selfishness also includes social and ethical elements. On the one hand, he recognizes many different motivations. On the other hand, most of these motivations could be grouped into the concept of enlightened self-love, where individuals rationally seek to maximize the approval of society, the impartial spectator and their self-respect. What emerges from his theory of motivation is an alternative to narrow egoism, namely a three-fold distinction between the motives of biological, social and ethical man. This in fact is precisely what emerges from the anthology called Culture, Social Norms and Economics that charts the developments at the forefront of critical contemporary economic theory today.
Mark Casson, "Introduction", p. xxvii.
Two important implications follow. Firstly, already in the genesis of economic theory, we have a clear direction towards a paradigm for economic theory very different to that of mainstream neo-classical economics today, calling for a modification of the rational choice model. On the one hand we need to recognize more motives for human action. In this respect, Amartya Sen follows in Smith 's footsteps, and argues that sympathy and commitment must complement narrow egoism as part of how we view behaviour. One the other hand, we need to re-think what our own private happiness and interest actually means. Satisfying Smithian self-love is not the same as satisfying our self-interest in a neoclassical way. In the latter, agents are motivated by instinctive pleasure/pain calculations to rationally maximize individual utility. For Smith, this is actually irrational because rational behaviour grows from an interactive social process of imagining and sympathizing with others as well as trying to maximize self-respect.
Amartya Sen, "Rational Fools: A Critique of the Behavioural Foundations of Economic Theory", p. 344.
Matthew Watson, Foundations of International Political Economy, p. 115.
Secondly, Smith sees the culture and ethics of economics as malleable. Therefore, economic analysis should be aware of its contributions to the economic culture and how it shapes the object of its study. Smith 's theory encourages critical social scientists. He sees science as invented by the human imagination so that the principles of nature can be connected and seen in the light of familiarity. Thus, unless the choice of these principles is placed under careful scrutiny, we can end up with self-fulfilling prophecies that also shape the world. Smith himself was deeply disturbed by the effects of capitalism on capitalists themselves, and the increasingly greedy and destructive powers the system unleashed. Indeed, a study in 1981 by Marwell and Ames suggested that learning economics makes people more selfish. Perhaps economists should recognize that their social science came out of moral philosophy in an age when moral progress was sought after. The crucial norms of fairness and trust that enable economies to work, "grow or wither" depending on the economic culture people live in and how they understand that culture. If these are left to be self-regulating, the danger is that the foundations for capitalism are hollowed out. Understanding Smith 's social philosophy helps us to better grasp our contemporary situation, perhaps most pertinently the relation of commercial practices and the moral life of society and increasing wide-spread moral corruption, amongst individuals and institutions. It is a critique of those economic theories which rest on the assumption of self-interest made from the very genesis of economic theory itself.
Spencer J. Pack, Capitalism as a Moral System: Adam Smith 's Critique of the Free Market Economy, p. 171.
Ibid, p. 173.
Daniel M. Hausman and Michael S. McPherson, Economic Analysis and Moral Philosophy, p. 219.
Ibid.
Ralph J. Lindgren, The Social Philosophy of Adam Smith, p. xiv.
