Insider dealing is summarised by McVea as, "the use of material inside information on public stock exchange (securities) markets to make a profit or avoid a loss". The problem of individuals abusing privileged inside information is not a new one. As early as the seventeenth century there were official reports of insiders using their privileged information to dump over-valued securities on the market. A statistical survey in 1971 demonstrated the potential scope of insider dealing. When asked what they would do if they learnt of a merger with a company whose shares were certain to rise when news of the merger became public, 12.5% of company directors said they would purchase shares and 11.5% would give the information to a friend.
McVea, H., What 's wrong with insider dealing?, 1995, 15 Legal Studies 390; see Criminal Justice Act 1993, section 52 for statutory definition.
Rider, Alexander & Linklater, Market Abuse and Insider Dealing, Butterworths, 2002, London, pp.1.
Webley, S., An Enquiry into Some Aspects of British Businessmen 's Behaviour, 1971, pp. 8-9.
It is instructive to consider that misuse of privileged information was only first criminalised by the Companies Act 1980. Prior to criminalisation, there was no statutory prohibition of insider dealing and the common law did not make insider dealing actionable. The very limited statutory controls were contained in the Companies Act 1967.
Companies Act 1980, sections 68-73.
Percival v Wright [1902] 2 Ch 421.
The Criminal Justice Act (CJA) 1993 is the current regulatory legislation and defines inside information as information relating to specific securities, which, if it were made public, would be likely to have a significant effect on their value. The CJA also prohibits the knowing disclosure of insider information to another.
Criminal Justice Act 1993, section 56 ibid, section 52(2); this is known as 'tipping' and 'tippee liability'.
It is important to note that there is no "constraint ... on the use of privileged knowledge in dealings other than securities". It is part of everyday commercial practice to use privileged knowledge to make a profit. If in every contractual situation a party with superior knowledge was required to share the knowledge with the other party, there would be no incentive to gather such knowledge. In transactions involving "the disposal of property and the conduct of commerce, it is necessary to have the best information available and therefore the acquisition of information should not be discouraged, let alone penalised." However, the basis for insider liability has continued to be expanded and the CJA extended the definition of  'securities' as well as 'insider' . see, Rider, supra, no.2, pp.1 ibid, pp.2.
Criminal Justice Act 1993, Schedule 2 ibid, section 57.
Insider dealing is not universally recognised as a problem and many commentators believe that it should neither be subject to regulation nor criminal sanctions. This essay will discuss, in part one, the principal reasons why securities receive extra legal protection and investigate whether the current regulatory system, especially whether or not the criminal offence of insider dealing, is either necessary or desirable. The second part of the essay will look at whether the current law has sufficiently broad powers to allow the regulatory bodies to prevent and punish insider dealing.
It is commonly believed that society is positively affected by an efficiently functioning stock market. It therefore follows that share prices should reflect as much information as possible to identify those companies where investors' capital is most valued. Detailed and reliable information ensures efficient investment of resources, as companies which are poorly managed or which no longer provide goods or services in which society is interested will not receive investment. It is therefore in a company 's interests to release "favourable information relating to ... future prospects [as this] will in general mean that the company will find it easier and cheaper to raise share capital". see: Preamble to Directive 2003/6/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, 28 January 2003, on insider dealing and manipulation (market abuse), Official Journal L096, 12/04/2003, pp. 16-25.
Channelling investors' capital to its most productive use in the market is known as "allocative efficiency" see, McVea, supra, no.1, pp393.
The best way to make this information available to the market would be to make a public announcement. However, public disclosure could, in many cases, devalue the information, lack credibility, or expose the company to liability if it later transpired that the information was inaccurate. Disclosure can also be costly and at some point the costs will outweigh the benefits of increased disclosure. Proponents of deregulation have, therefore, argued that insider dealing is the most reliable and cost-effective mechanism for channelling this information to the market.
Carlton, W.D., & Fischel, D.R., The Regulation of Insider Dealing, 1983, 35 Stanford Law Review 857 see, McVea, supra, no.1, pp394.
Insider dealing also reflects a company 's financial prospects with greater accuracy, as all information, whether public or not, is factored into the share price. This has a positive affect on allocated efficiency. The price paid by investors, and society as a whole, for this greater efficiency is that insider dealers are able to make profits at others' expense. Manne argues that "it is desirable to have all ups and downs [in share prices] smoothed out to the extent possible", as this ensures a more secure and fair deal for investors. Insider dealing would help balance share prices by reducing violent fluctuations following sudden corporate disclosures.
Barry, N., "Witchcraft and Insider Dealing", pp.28-34: in MacQueen, H.L. (ed), Insider Dealing, The David Hume Institute, Edinburgh, 1993.
Heller, H., Chiarella, SEC Rule 14e-3 and Dirks: 'Fairness' versus Economic Theory", 1982, 37 Business Lawyer 517, pp.539-540.
Manne, H.G., Insider Trading and the Law Professors, 23 Vanderbilt Law Review 547, pp. 574.
These arguments are countered by proponents of regulation who argue that the foundation of the capital markets' allocative efficiency is integrity. Unscrupulous insiders could adversely affect this efficiency. Insiders could use late disclosures to create more time to purchase securities. Similarly, ambiguous announcements would allow insiders to buy securities at a lower price and then sell at a higher price following a later, definitive announcement. This would create a "causal relationship between insider trading activity and the accuracy and timeliness of corporate disclosures". for a definition of "Allocative Efficiency" see supra, no.13.
Cox, J.D., Insider Trading and Contracting: A critical response to the "Chicago School", 1986, Duke Law Journal 628, pp.636.
Such practices would clearly affect allocative efficiency and justify regulatory intervention. There is, however, a dramatic difference between market manipulation and insider dealing, just as a reliable tip on a winning horse differs from having the race fixed. Few deregulators argue that market manipulation should be permitted. Furthermore, there is a distinct lack of empirical evidence to suggest that any incidences of insider dealing have affected the disclosure or the accuracy of information from a firm. This is most likely due to the number of "deals being conducted through a nominee or by a relative or friend [as well as] insiders' reticence to talk about their activities". see, Manne, supra, no.19, pp. 575 see, Cox, supra, no.21, pp.637.
Suter, J., The Regulation of Insider Dealing in Britain, 1989, Butterworths, pp.2.
Admittedly, unregulated use of inside information would result in a financial risk for the investor. This risk would be roughly equal across the entire securities market and, prima facie, there would be a negligible affect on allocative efficiency. However, the lack of affect relies on the assumption that investors are limited to securities. If investors decide to offset the insider risk by investing in other markets, instruments, or commodities then allocational problems would ensue. see, Cox, supra, no.21, pp.638 ibid, pp.641; for example investors may choose to invest in US Treasury Bills (the closest available risk-free investment).
Market liquidity is a measure of how easily a security can be sold or bought without causing a significant price movement and with a minimal loss of value. Proponents of regulation argue that insider dealing would reduce liquidity, because market-makers would be affected by "the cost of being damaged by an informed trader". This cost is transferred to the clients of the market-maker in the form of an increased spread and a decline in liquidity. The consequences of reduced liquidity are "greater risk, greater costs to trading, lower returns to investors ... [a less] informationally efficient [market and increased cost] for financing investment". Clearly for this reason it is highly desirable to limit insider dealing as much as possible and protect market-makers and thereby investors from the low liquidity of assets.
Klock, M., Mainstream Economics and the Case for Prohibiting Insider Trading, 10 Georgia State University Law Review 330, 1993-1994, pp. 330 ibid.
Totally unregulated practice of insider dealing would allow directors to make profits independently of the company making a profit or a loss. This would be a problem for shareholders and creditors, as directors could unilaterally decide their compensation and would possibly be "indifferent between working to make the firm prosperous and working to make the firm bankrupt". If directors were perceived to do this then investor confidence would be undermined across the entire securities market and the cost of raising capital would increase for all companies. On the other hand, investors' decisions "to sell or purchase [are] unaffected by whether the insider is also secretly buying or selling shares on the open market [therefore] the investor is no worse off when the insider trades than when the insider does not trade" . This shows that investors' confidence should not be influenced. for example by selling short a director would profit if the underlying value of the shares went down see, Carlton, supra, no.15, pp.873 see, Cox, supra, no.21, pp.635.
Whilst this argument shows that investors' confidence ought not to be undermined, it is generally accepted that "the presence of [regulatory] laws is required if investor confidence in the integrity of the markets is to be preserved and promoted". The protection of investor confidence is vital for a strong and stable economy; therefore efficient anti-insider dealing regulation is crucial. see, Rider, supra, no.2, pp.3.
Proponents of insider dealing argue that inside information is a property right which belongs to the company and can be used to compensate directors. It is suggested that directors and stockholders would contract to engage in insider dealing because it would be to their mutual advantage. see, Cox, supra, no.21, pp.642.
If the opportunity to trade with inside information was left open to directors, it would encourage innovation and thereby greater efficiency and profit making. However, pro-regulators argue for practical and principled reasons, that this idea is unfeasible. see, McVea, supra, no.1, pp.399.
The practical difficulties include the impossibility for directors and stockholders to accurately quantify the good and harm done by insider dealing and thereby accurately assess the potential costs and benefits of their agreement. Furthermore, insider dealing is an unpredictable and dangerous reward for managers, as the opportunity may not often arise and the highly sensitive information would lose all value if leaked. see, Cox, supra, no.21, pp.653-656.
Principled objections include the possibility that the director will use shock news to cause the price of the shares to change as much as possible, which could include trying to make the company perform badly. It is apparent that the arguments against viewing inside information as a property right outweigh the potential benefits of increased innovation.
Ethical considerations probably carry more weight than economic ones and are important to the underlying philosophy of regulation. Kay contends that "it is contrary to good business ethics that a man holding a position of trust in a company should use confidential information for his personal benefit [and] good business ethics should be supported and reinforced through legal sanctions".
Kay, M., Justice Report on Insider Trading, 1973, 36 Modern Law Review 185-192, pp. 186.
Good business ethics also have significant practical consequences. "The UK 's position as a leading international financial centre depends on ... its reputation as a clean and fair place to do business". This reputation is derived from inter alia the enforcement of high ethical standards, which in turn ensures investor confidence in the market. The reputation of the markets is vital to the economy and its protection alone is enough to justify criminal sanctions for insider dealing. see, Rider, supra, no.2, pp.47.
Regulation is also seen to have positive affects on other aspects of the market and "the efficacy of anti-insider dealing regulation has ... become almost a litmus test for the efficacy and competence of the wider regulatory structure overseeing the markets and the conduct of business in the financial sector". ibid, pp.3.
Having studied the economic and ethical arguments it seems clear that regulation is desirable and that insider dealing should entail criminal sanctions. It is now necessary to examine whether the law successfully deters and punishes insiders.
Insider dealing is widespread and extremely difficult to eradicate and the UK has a poor success rate for enforcing these offences. Although insider dealing was introduced as an offence in 1980, it was not until the late 1980s that there were any convictions. This can most likely be explained by the fact that the prosecution is required to prove, "to the high standard of the criminal law, a set of facts which in practice renders many cases incapable of prosecution". Furthermore, in many cases it would be impractical to try to discover all those who might have profited from inside information because it would be found that most of them acted on rumours from sources they could not identify. ibid, pp.31.
Mistry, H.B., Battle of the Regulators: Is the U.S. system of securities regulation better provided for than that which operates in the United Kingdom?, Journal of International Financial Markets, 2002, pp.141 see, Rider, supra, no.2, pp.32 ibid, pp.10 see, Heller, supra, no.18, pp.539.
The enforcement of insider dealing regulation is also extremely expensive. In the US case of Chiarella, the insider was compelled to return the $30,000 profit he made to the shareholders who owned small quantities of shares in various companies. The cost to the government in pursuing criminal and civil proceedings against Chiarella substantially exceeded his relatively modest profit. This problem of expense is repeated in many insider dealing cases.
Chiarella v United States, 445 U.S. 222, 1980 see, Heller, supra, no.18, pp.539.
To tackle the low conviction rate for insider dealing, the Financial Services and Markets Act (FSMA) 2000 was introduced. The FSMA is designed to both complement and fill gaps left by the CJA, which did not provide a civil remedy for companies or unsuspecting outsiders. The FSMA also created the offence of market abuse. This offence is significantly broader than insider dealing, and can be committed by using information in investment activity, which is not publicly available. The Act also provided the Financial Services Authority (FSA) with new and extensive investigative and enforcement powers.
Financial Services and Markets Act 2000, section 118 (1) & (2).
The FSA can impose civil sanctions, including a "penalty of such amount as it considers appropriate" and seek restitution in cases where privileged information is abused. The FSA also has the power to seek injunctions against breaches of the insider dealing legislation. However, due to the continued inability of the FSA to impose criminal sanctions on insider dealing, the civil remedies should extend further. ibid, section 123 (1) ibid, section 383 ibid, section 380 - 386.
The UK should seek to follow some of the United States' inventive approaches towards insider dealing. The US Securities Exchange Commission has adopted an extremely pragmatic approach for dealing with insider dealing, by implementing 'consent decrees'. This allows alleged insiders to pay a fine and promise not to undertake insider dealing again, without having to admit liability or wrongdoing. This is a highly effective mechanism, as it is both punitive and preventative without imparting any guilt. Financial savings are also made, as the alleged offender is likely to accept the punishment without the need for a complex and expensive court case. Moreover, the problem of establishing a set of facts to a criminal standard of proof is avoided. see, Mistry, supra, no.40, pp.140.
A further helpful development of UK law would be to clarify and, if necessary, extend the scope of private civil actions. In Chase Manhattan the courts said that a contract could not be affected by insider dealing. However, the new legislation has changed from stating that the contract is "not to be considered void or voidable" to "not to be considered void or unenforceable", there is debate as to whether this is still the valid law. If the UK law does still follow Chase Manhattan then the common law should be extended to allow private actions. In Kardon the U.S. courts extended the private rights of individuals to seek civil actions for offences such as insider dealing and this is one of the most successful ways of enforcing breaches under U.S. anti-fraud provisions.
Chase Manhattan Equities Ltd v Goodman [1991] B.C.C. 308.
Company Securities (Insider Dealing) Act 1983 section 8(3).
Criminal Justice Act 1993 section 63(2).
Kardon v National Gypsum Company [1946] 69 F.S. 512.
Notwithstanding the debate over the economic affects and regardless of the lack of empirical evidence; it seems clear, to protect investor confidence and the reputation of the UK markets, that insider dealing should remain a criminal offence. Criminal sanctions are a desirable preventative mechanism as they limit the incentive to abuse or manipulate the market for insider profits. However, criminal sanctions should only apply to those "whose conduct is 'plainly morally reprehensible' rather than [for] technical offences".
Rickett, C. (ed.), Book review: Essays on Insider Trading and Securities Regulation, 1998, Journal of Business Law, pp.622-623.
Civil remedies under the FSMA are the most valuable to regulate technical infringements. The legislature should consider increasing the powers of the FSA as well as allowing private actions to increase the success rate of detecting and punishing insiders. A similar system to the US 'consent decrees' should be adopted. The overall aim should be to lower the costs of pursuing "small fry" whilst ensuring the "big fish" no longer get away.
