Debates about research relying on the experiences of women have dominated feminists' discourses for years. Feminists challenged traditional research methods that ignore women 's experiences, and argue that for any research to lead to improved lives of women it must privilege women 's voices. Thus giving rise to feminist 'epistemologies', indicating its diversity; this also has raised interesting debates amongst feminist researchers. The challenge for feminist researchers has been how women 's knowledge can be produced without biases and not privileging the researcher as the 'knower of knowledge'. The aim of this essay is to evaluate the life story research which produced a book - 'Nisa: The Life and Words of a !Kung Woman' by Shostak Marjorie, and establish the relationship between research design, epistemology, and power and ethics in the research process.
The essay is structured into five parts. The first section gives background information of the exotic life story of Nisa as illustrated in the book. The second section will discuss the research design in relation to current feminist methods. The third section will discuss epistemology, while the fourth section will discuss power and ethics in the research process. While these sections are clearly distinguished, the essay will at every point make a link between each of the issues discussed. The last section which is the conclusion will reflect on the overall issues discussed and would argue that Nisa 's story gives the reader insight into the life of the !Kung woman, although the authenticity of her story remains in conflict with the author, as she continuously warns that the story does not represent the whole range of experience available to women in !Kung culture(Shostak, 1990:43). This only reflects one of the dilemmas in research methods. However, her ability to confirm Nisa 's stories gives credit to the research output.
The book is a product of field trips by Marjorie Shostak between 1969 and 1974, to Botswana towards the end of a large-scale specialist research, organized by Richard Lee and Irven DeVore of Harvard University. Their research on !Kung people focused on their health, nutrition, demography, archaeology, infant growth and development, population genetics, ritual healing ceremonies, folklore and women 's life cycles. The author arrived just at the end of the project when earlier researchers had left the field (Shostak, 1990:5). !Kung is a remote village on the Northern border of the Kalahari desert in Botswana. The major means of subsistence for generations in this community is gathering and hunting. Nisa is a member of one of the last remaining traditional gather-hunter societies, a group, which prefers to be called Zhun/twasi, 'the real people', who currently live in isolated areas of Botswana, Angola, and Namibia. Referred to in the past as the Sonquas, and in Botswana as the Basarwa, they are also known as the !Kung bushmen, the !Kung San or simply the !Kung. The !Kung are mostly short and light skinned, with high cheek bones and oriental-looking eyes (Shostak, 1990:4).
During the period, Shostak interviewed a broad range of women. The author attempted to meet some of her needs for friendship by getting to know a few of the women (Shostak, 1990:17). She used series of recorded interviews to conduct the research. This however, was partially successful, until she met and took immediate dislike to Nisa, the 50 year old lousy !Kung woman, who turned out to be the  'star' in the book. Shostak 's inability to ignore Nisa 's loud voice forced her to enter into contract with her to be one of the informants in the story on the life of !Kung women (Shostak, 1990:39).
Reading through the story makes you feel you know much about Nisa, as she gives details of her exhilarating life story. Nisa tells explicitly how she felt about many aspects of her life, from her early years, weaning, growing up, and developing emotions to adulthood, menstruation and the rituals around it, taking lovers, trial marriages, and marriage relationships. She told stories of sexual exploits, extramarital relationships, birth control, infanticide, child birth, death of her husband and children, pains, happy times, life in the bush and stories about fighting and dancing, and how often this migrant society usually relocates from one part of the desert to another in search of food and water, and finally how she felt about old age.
Nisa 's expression and explicit account of very intimate and emotional issues gives the reader information about the life of the !Kung women and also indicates the closeness that existed between her and the researcher. The fifteen chapters of the book address each of the stages in Nisa 's life, and usually start with an introduction by the author covering the wider !Kung society and followed by Nisa 's account. Having given an account of the case study, the next section will examine the research design.
According to De Vaus the function of research design is to ensure that the evidence obtained from research enables the researcher to answer the initial research questions clearly (2001:9). For Punch, research design is the basic plan for a piece of research, and has four main parts: the strategy, the conceptual framework, who or what will be studied, and finally the tools and procedures to be used for collecting and analysing empirical materials (2005:63).
In order to answer these questions effectively, it is important to start with the research aim. For the case study being analysed, the researcher 's interest in the study emanates from the fact that during the period of the research, there were concerns about traditional values pertaining to marriage and sexuality in the Western World. At that time women 's movement had just begun to gain momentum, calling for the re-examination of the traditional roles of Western women (Shostak, 1990:5). The researcher hoped that the research would help to bring to a global perspective the different lives of women in the world. The research interest leads to the development of research questions. As mentioned earlier, while all these steps are treated as separate sections, they are all interrelated.
The researcher 's choice of research area is based on curiosity to satisfy her research interest and the quest to close the knowledge gap in research that has been carried out on !Kung people by anthropologists' from Harvard University. This position helped her to develop the research questions. In conducting a qualitative research it is advisable to develop both general and specific questions (Punch, 2005:34). In the introductory chapter of the book, Shostak developed both general and specific questions, having identified a gap in existing research. The research that was conducted at that time focused on health and nutrition, demography, archaeology, infant growth and development, child rearing practices, population genetics, ritual healing ceremonies, and women 's life circle. Despite the wide range of areas covered by the research, there seems to be a misunderstanding on the way of life of !Kung people among the researchers (Shostak, 1990:5).
Broadly, the general research question was to explore a culture, which was outwardly different from that of the researcher 's world, and to identify any universals if any. Having asked the general questions, the researcher stated specifically that her interest was the lives of !Kung women and what it was like being a woman in !Kung. The following are the specific research questions: 'To explore how the !Kung women feel about themselves, their childhood, and their parents? What love relationship is like; did spouses love one another? Did they feel jealous, and did love survive marriage? What were their dreams like and what did they make of them? Were they afraid of growing old or afraid of death?' (Shostak, 1990:5). At the stage of specifying her interest on women in relation to the questions, Shostak has been able to trim her research to a manageable size, to enhance the output. According to Punch focusing on what will be researched helps at all stages of the research project (2005:36). Basically, research questions have five main functions: organize the project, sets boundaries, keep researcher focused, and provide a framework for writing up as well as selection of data for analysis (Punch, 2005:37). In the case study the research questions played the major roles as identified by Punch, especially as it pertains to developing appropriate research design.
The literature gives information on the nature of the substantive problem and how much is known about it, how well developed the literature in a particular area is, and how closely the study wants to follow the directions established by the literature. In addition the literature enables the researcher to have considerable knowledge on the researched (Punch, 2005:41). For the case study, the researcher had advance information on the !Kung people. Literature from reports of research on !Kung people gave her insight into some aspects of their life. In reading through the text it is evident that she builds into the research the literature, as clearly indicated by the notes section at the end of the book, which also gives information on the sources of data.
A hypothesis is a predicted answer to a research question, but Punch asked an important question of the relevance of a research hypothesis to the research (2005:38). The hypothesis for the case study is stated thus: 'a study revealing what !Kung women 's lives were like today, might reflect what their lives has been like for generations, possibly even for thousands of years' (Shostak, 1990:6). The research product is expected to be a reflection of women 's lives as at the time of the research or even years earlier. The potentials of research producing the expected answer to research questions could be contested (Punch, 2005:38). For the case study, since the research had identified a gap in an existing research, and the research questions have been developed based on this, the life story has the potential to answer the questions.
Going back to the four main areas of research design which includes: the strategy, the conceptual framework, who or what will be studied, the tools and procedures for collecting and analysing empirical materials. Starting with the strategy, it is obvious that the researcher was set to carry out the research by living amongst the researched community, in which case the approach used is ethnographic. This is in line with Hammersley and Atkinson 's views of ethnographic research, where the researcher participates, overtly or covertly in people 's daily lives for an extended period of time (1995:1-10). The conceptual framework for the case study is to reveal the life of women in !Kung (Shostak, 1990:5), which helped to develop the research questions (Punch, 2005:53). The research set to collect data from both women and men, although there is no information on how many people the researcher intended to collect data from, what is evident is that the researcher expected to get the perspectives of both women and men. While selection of participants were not objective or strictly representative, the women she chose to interview were those she felt she could establish good rapport with, and who were representative of the conditions of life of the !Kung. Overall she interviewed eight women in addition to Nisa, ranging from age fourteen to seventy (Shostak, 1990:20). The age range however shows evidence of representation of the different stages of lives of !Kung women.
The research adopted a qualitative methodology, where researchers study spoken and written representations; it also involves recording human experiences and use of multiple methods of data collection (Punch, 2005: 168). Shostak used a combination of methods to collect data for the research, which includes: unstructured interviews, recordings, and observations. The multi-method adopted is typical of ethnographic research (Reinharz, 1992:46). Feminist researchers find interviewing engaging as it offers researchers access to people 's ideas, thoughts, and memories in their own words, this is particularly important for the study of women, because it solves the problem of centuries of ignoring women in research (Reinharz, 1992:19). This definition suits the research being discussed, as its main objective is to reveal the life of !Kung women. To carry out the interview effectively, the researcher had to learn the !Kung language, to enhance the quality of the research and avoid reliance on third party interpretation of recorded interview, this has the potential of distorting information collected. In addition it will enhance participants observation, according to the author 'upon arriving in the field, I did everything I could to understand the !Kung life: I learned the language, went on gathering expeditions.......... I gained an invaluable perspective, participating and watching' (Shostak 1990:6). These interactions create trusts between the researcher and participants.
In discussing data analysis Punch points out that researchers are faced with the challenge of representation, this is reflected in the written data, which has the potential to reflect the researchers constructed ideas (2005:58). Shostak, however identified potential problems with data collected, as she was not sure if the questions she asked were clear to the women she interviewed, in her words, 'teach me what it is to be a !Kung woman, was the way I had presented myself to Nisa and to the other women. How much this had influenced each woman 's self-representation was not clear' (1990:349-50).
To what extent women 's experiences can be a reliable source of knowledge in any research has been a complex and debated issue among feminist researchers. In the case study whose major objective is to reveal the lives of !Kung women, through representation of their experiences, the researcher expressed concern over the validity of the different versions of accounts of women 's lives from the women she interviewed. She explicitly stated that Nisa 's story is not a fair representation of !Kung life, either in her experience or in her personality, and adds that her views were not shared by others (Shostak, 1990:350). But according to Scott when experience is taken as the origin of knowledge, the vision of the subject (the person who had the experience or the historian who recounts it) becomes the bedrock of evidence upon which explanation is built. It is important not to ignore experience but recognise its constructed nature and the role played by language and discourse (1992:25). In essence we need to be aware that experience is factual and socially constructed. Experience establishes the existence of individuals and operates within the ideological construction that makes the individual the starting point of knowledge (Scott, 1992:27). The argument about the truth in women 's account only validates the claim by second wave feminists that women are different. Feminists claim that using women 's experience, as a starting point is the only option left for feminist researchers. The discussions on research methods and its link to using women 's experience as a starting point for feminist research shows the relationship between the research process and epistemology.
Harding defined epistemology as the theory of knowledge, that seeks to answer questions of the source of knowledge, and who will be accepted as an appropriate generator of legitimate knowledge and on what grounds? Feminists have accused traditional epistemology of ignoring the experience of women in research. They proposed feminist epistemology, which is an alternative theory of knowledge that legitimates women as 'knowers' (1987a:3). Harding identifies two types of epistemologies: 'feminist empiricist' and 'feminist standpoint' (1987b:182). Feminist empiricism stresses the continuities between traditional justifications of scientific research and feminist ones. In contrast, feminist standpoint stresses the continuities between the radical upheavals in social understanding created by nineteenth-century class struggles and those created by feminist inquiry. The differences that exist between them reflect the struggles in mainstream discourses between liberal and Marxist theories of human nature and politics. Both epistemologies are attempting to produce a feminist science that is complete and undistorted (Harding, 1987b:186-187).
Many feminists have defined feminist standpoint from different perspectives. Marxian epistemology for instance claims that to acquire knowledge of a phenomenon one must be in a position to experience the phenomenon and its effects. Many feminists have criticised this position for its gender blindness. Hartsock drawing from the Marxian ideology argues that women 's superior way of knowing derives from their position in sexual division of labour (1983:284). This claim is similar to that made by Rose, who acknowledged the central role of emotional involvement in the process of knowledge acquisition (1983:84). The theory of experience has support of other feminists. For Smith what makes women 's experience valuable from an epistemic viewpoint is their dual marginal and central position in the current set of social relations, which sustains the current patriarchal systems (1988:81).
Harding (1991) and Bar On (1993) however, argue that the claim that women have a set of experiences presupposes that women have essential features that ignore the important differences among women. This view is shared by Spelman (1990) and Tanesini who propose that women are different, and that the version of standpoint theory based on shared experiences underestimates the importance of differences between women (1999:147).
Women 's experiences in traditional social science recognises that social science ask questions about social life that appears problematic from within the social experiences that are characterized by men (white, Western, bourgeois), who ask only those questions about nature and social life which (white, Western, bourgeois) men want answered (Harding, 1987a:6). This perspective is reflected in the !Kung research, as observed by Shostak, researchers who worked in the !Kung community did not cover aspects of their way of life, especially from the perspective of women (Shostak, 1990:5). In relation to the case study, defining what is in need of scientific explanation from the perspective of men 's experiences leads to partial understanding of social life (Harding, 1987a:6). Obviously, researching the life of !Kung women has proved that it is only from women that the experiences of women is expected to be revealed. Within these experiences, there are multiple realities of women 's lives, which provide an explanation for the different experiences recounted by women interviewed by Shostak (Harding, 1987a:7).
Some feminist argue that standpoint should not rely only on experiences, as generalising experience has the tendency of making invisible the experiences of marginalised groups of women (Tanesini, 1999: 147). As argued by Scott experience is fallible and therefore questionable, hence cannot be taken as a ground for all knowledge, because this would amount to ignoring its constructed nature (1992:25). Harding 's strong objectivity however sees feminist standpoint not as arising consciously from women 's experiences but rather as a politically chosen social location, thus knowledge production is deliberately partial (1993:72). Nisa 's account therefore could be said to reflect how the researcher judged stories told by the other women, and how Nisa 's story is validated to produce knowledge of the life of !Kung women. Although Shostak acknowledged that Nisa 's stories could be distorted as she had doubts over Nisa 's account of her childhood (1990:31), but according to Harding, some standpoint are less distorted than others and can therefore be a starting point for knowledge production (1991:185). This implies that Nisa 's story represents a starting point for knowledge on the life of !Kung women.
Shostak choice of researching women authenticates that standpoint is political, as it begins from the position of people who have been marginalised from previous researches conducted in the community. This standpoint explains the choice of research method that was adopted. Which enabled the researcher to obtain information from the women on a wide range of issues pertaining to their life? The range of participants selected for the study is informed by experiences of women. The above discussions suggest that defining epistemology and adopting the views of most feminist that research should start from women 's experience within a social context will influence the research design process.
Ethics concerns the morality of human conduct. In relation to social research, it refers to the moral deliberation, choice and accountability on the part of researchers throughout the research process (Edwards and Mauthner, 2002:14). Edwards and Mauthner locate their discussion on ethics within a legitimate concern with the issues of power (2002:14). They also highlight the importance of ethical decisions through out the research process. The epistemologies of theoretical perspectives informing research have also been discussed as generating ethical questions (2002:19). Power is discernable in three interrelated dimensions: power difference stemming from different positions of the researcher and participants; power exerted during the research process; and power exerted during the post-fieldwork period (Wolf, 1996:2). This essay will rely on the relationship between research design, epistemology and ethics in discussing this section.
How contact is made with participants during the process of collecting data is an important aspect of the relationship between the researcher and participants. Some feminist favour interviews as a method of inquiry, as it eliminates power over the participants and helps to develop a sense of connectedness (Reinharz, 1992:20). Ann Oakley points out that the goal of finding out about people through interviewing is best achieved when the relationship between the interviewer and interviewee is non-hierarchical, and the interviewer is prepared to invest his or her own personal identity in the relationship (1981:41). This was effectively adopted by Shostak as illustrated in this statement, 'I presented myself to them pretty much as I saw myself at the time: a girl-woman, recently married, struggling with the issues of love, marriage, sexuality, work, and identity - basically, with what womanhood meant to me' (Shostak, 1990:7). The way she presented herself helped her to build trust and friendship with the women she interviewed, as some of them confessed they never could have discussed issues raised by the researcher with a man (Shostak, 1990: 22). This validates the claim by some feminists, that it is easy for a woman to interview other women. Some feminists, who are of the view that interview relationship is dependent on the relative position of the researcher and the researched in social formation, have opposed this view (Burgos, 1989 cited in Phoenix, 1994:50). They believe that simply being women discussing 'women 's issues' in the context of a research interview is not sufficient for the establishment of rapport and the easy flow of an interview (Phoenix, 1994:50). Shostak had challenges in establishing friendship with some of the women. For instance efforts at building friendship with Hwantla never materialized, as stated by Shostak: 'yet most of the time she seemed reluctant to invest much of herself in our work, even less in her relationship with me' (1990: 35). The researcher however acknowledged that Hwantla was preoccupied with personal problems. Further to this, the researchers account that women participated in the research because of monetary incentives and an opportunity for them to talk to someone means that the woman interviewer - woman interviewee situation does not always produce rapport through gender identification (Phoenix, 1994:55).
The power positions between the interviewer and the interviewee are not fixed dichotomies; positions can shift over the course of the interview (Phoenix, 1994: 55). A good example is the relationship between Shostak and Nisa. During the interview process, Nisa felt she had the knowledge, as information was sought from her (Shostak, 1990: 40). In interpreting and producing data, the researcher has the power to determine what is relevant or not relevant (Phoenix, 1994:55). This is evident in the researcher 's expression of concern over the accuracy of Nisa 's accounts (Shostak, 1990: 350). Believing participants have been identified as a controversial aspect of feminist research. According to Reinhaiz social interaction involves a certain amount of deception because science relies on uncertainties, this however does not imply that feminist researchers believe the women they interview all the time (1992:28). I will suggest that Shostak 's action finds support in this position.
A further example of power relations can be seen in the ability of the researcher to provide incentives for interviewees and other people in the community. This is in line with Golde 's suggestion that fieldwork should encompass some form of reciprocity; meaning that researchers should be able to offer services or materials in exchange for the privilege of studying and disrupting other peoples lives (1986:73). This phenomenon did not work out well for Shostak as she complained that it was becoming impossible to sustain the villagers demands, in addition this had implications for life after the researcher leaves the community, as they live communal life, sharing resources, and occasionally working in exchange for goods (1990:27). Although the ideas of Golde 's are useful, they do not take into account the exploitative nature of the research process (1986:73). The relationship between the researcher and participants is based on engagement and attachment, where participants are at the risk of manipulation and betrayal from the researcher. The only reward for the participant is the researcher 's undivided attention during the interview (Stacey, 1991:114, Patai, 1991:142). In the case study, Shostak developed friendship with Nisa, but in evaluating their friendship she felt detached (1990:357). This action provides evidence that the researcher only developed friendship with her for the purpose of the research, but it is possible that Nisa felt genuine friendship existed between them, if that is the case then the withdrawal by the researcher was exploitative. But according to Duncombe and Jessop, all interview relationships, including women 's interview with women, are situated somewhere along a spectrum between the extremes or more genuine empathy and relationships with an element of 'faking' (2002:120).
The issue of whether a researcher can represent groups she/he does not belong to, especially groups with less power and influence has been debated by many feminists. Similarly, recognition of the researcher 's role in constructing 'knowledge' about women has generated numerous debates about the ethics and politics of 'representing the other' (Gillies and Alldred, 2002:39).
Feminist researchers often emphasize commonalities between themselves and the participants of their research as a validation of their rights to represent other women. Gillies and Alldred, however argue that structural and individual differences may sometimes conflict with similarities (2002:40). In the case study, Shostak 's advantage is the fact that she is a woman seeking to understand the life of the !Kung woman, she claimed that all the women talked to her specifically as a person and as a woman (1990:21). The commonality being advocated by feminists seems to work in this instance, but as stated by Gillies and Alldred, cultural differences could influence the outcome of the interview and the way data will be interpreted. This position finds support in this statement made by Shostak:
In contrast, many feminists believe that when emphasis is placed on sameness, power differences are highlighted in terms of whose version of the account is eventually told, even if the research is presented as a co-construction (Gillies and Alldred, 2002:24).
In response to ethical/political concerns, some feminists have argued against speaking for others, this however has generated much debate and dispute. But as noted by Gillies and Alldred, the argument that researchers should avoid representing groups who occupy less powerful positions is difficult to sustain morally. Not to speak about, or for others encourages silences and gaps, which marginalize and exclude, while cementing the privilege of those with the more powerful voices (2002:41). If we follow this line of argument then we can say that Shostak is justified to research on the !Kung women, because they have been previously marginalized by researchers, who in this case were more powerful (Shostak, 1990:5).
Closely related to this is the question of how 'life-stories' can be judged as appropriate. Gillies and Alldred suggest that notions of authenticity and 'truth' should be problematised, so that legitimacy of particular representations can be evaluated, not in terms of accuracy, but according to what is revealed about the basis of interpretation (2002:41). One prominent ethical dilemma Shostak faced in her research on !Kung people, was authenticating Nisa 's account. The dilemma arose because of the different accounts of the women she interviewed. She expressed concern over Nisa 's emphasis on negative experiences to the point that her narrative portrayed an extreme view of her culture. Shostak toiled with the idea of the truth about Nisa 's account, and justified publishing it as a way of balancing the one sided picture that has been painted by past researchers (1990:350). This action is political and is in line with feminists proposal that the researcher 's position in relation to those whom she is representing needs to be thoroughly explored, in terms of her own social, political and personal interest, and the assumptions she brings to her understanding of those she is researching (Gillies and Alldred, 2002:42).
Seeking consent for publication is another aspect of the case study where ethical issues reflected. The question is, what obligation does the researcher have to the women she interviewed, particularly when it comes to publication of her findings? Johnson drawing from Fichter and Kolb (1953) outlined the responsibilities of the researcher to six entities: sponsors, funding agencies, publishers, other scientists, society, and participants. He adds a seventh one, the researcher, as she/he could be faced with negative reactions as a result of the research (1982:84). In the case study, Shostak experienced some negative reactions from the community she researched. Members of the community misinterpreted her research, as women she interviewed were labelled as unfaithful to their partners. A man who accused his wife of infidelity reflected this in this statement: 'if you are n't having affairs, what does Marjorie (referring to Shostak) speak to you about all the time?'(Shostak, 1990: 350).
In seeking Nisa 's consent for confidentiality and to publish, Shostak behaved responsibly to her research participants (Shostak, 1990:350). According to Barnes, with publication, researchers run the risk of making public what participants would prefer to keep secret, he advised that one way of controlling the effect of publication is to make sure that those affected agree to what is being said about them (1970:246). I find Shostak 's discussion with Nisa deceptive. Shostak stated that she would conceal identities, although it is unlikely that any repercussions from the book would reach Nisa (1990:251). This gives the impression that Shostak published the book with very private details of Nisa 's life, knowing that Nisa would never know how she was represented in the book. Johnson advised that researchers in preparing their manuscripts should assume that both the identities of the location studied and the identities of the individuals will be discovered, and reflect on the consequences before publishing, and think about what people will feel when they read about themselves (1982:87). This did not apply to Nisa as she could neither read nor have access to books (Shostak, 1990:351). Shostak, further displayed her sense of responsibility by promising to share the resources from the book with Nisa and with the Kalahari People 's Fund (a foundation of the !Kung people). To what extent Nisa understood this remains questionable.
Some feminists have proposed that researchers should link ethics, methods, methodologies and epistemology. For Code, there are ethical issues involved in research relationships, as well as in being accountable within the varied sets of relations that comprise any given research project (1987:10). From the beginning of a research and after completion, a researcher and their work exist in many complex sets of relationships. In recognising these multiple contexts, which influence the research process, there are potential conflicts of interests. The researcher has the responsibility of being accountable not only to research participants but also to those who read, re-interpret and take seriously the claim that the research makes (Doucet and Mauthner, 2002:125). Doucet and Mauthner argue that reflexivity holds together methodology, epistemology and ethics. The researcher has to be transparent within the wider context of reflexivity (2002:125). In the epilogue chapter of the case study under review, Shostak reflected on the dilemmas of interpreting the data she collected, and how representative and true where Nisa 's story of !Kung life style. The other major issue was her obligation to discuss with Nisa her intention of publishing her life story (1990:350). These accounts give the reader an insight into the dilemmas that took place before, during, and after the research process, and I will view this as being accountable and transparent.
An analysis of the research on !Kung women as reflected in the book - 'Nisa: The Life and Words of a !Kung Woman', clearly shows evidence of the interrelationship, between research design, epistemology, and ethics and power in the research process. It is justifiable to say that the research answered the research questions. Despite difficulties in carrying out the research and some dilemmas that arose during the process, the researcher was able to problemitise and deal with problems. Her reflexivity is a confirmation of her research skills and display of professionalism. The fact remains that researching live stories will continue to present varied challenges to researchers, as human life is not static.
