Emo-tion is an idea for a retail shop based in the town of Cirencester.
Emo-tion takes advantage of a gap in the market for musical equipment and accessories aimed directly at 14-19 year olds.
There are many towns across the UK with no retail outlet aimed directly at this age range; the scope for growth is large.
Emo-tion is jointly owned by and . has retail experience and has run his own business for 16 years.
We are looking for   4000 initial investment for premises, initial stock and wages to staff.
The idea for Emo-tion was formed early this year when the need for a shop selling commodities aimed at 14-19 year old teenagers appeared in Cirencester. Local students at Cirencester College also felt that Cirencester needed an outlet where they could buy guitars, popular DC/Converse shoes and 'Emo' accessories. Emo is a name given to a fashion culture in teenage boys and girls which involves wearing dark clothing, studs, black make-up and customizing old clothes.
Emo-tion is a shop aimed to fill this gap in the market within the town of Cirencester and surrounding villages, with a combined estimated population of 40,000.
The market for the idea of Emo-tion is nearly completely open. There is no shop in Cirencester selling guitars or anything music related apart from CD 's. There are however, shops selling music related products in Swindon (over 15 miles away). Market research has shown that the public would use Emo-tion over travelling to Swindon.
In the questionnaire for Emo-tion, 100% of people said they would visit and buy items from the shop. Emo accessories are also hard to come by in the local area and placing all these products under one roof would provide a unique selling point to the company.
Fashion trends currently have a life span of about 5 years. The company believes however that Emo-tion could adapt to any fashion change and still survive. A need for musical equipment will always exist and it is possible a contract could be set up with local schools to fulfil this need.
Appendix 2 contains Emo-tion 's proposed products.
For the musical market, Emo-tion will have 100% market share within the town of Cirencester. Emo-tion will have 80% of the Market for DC 's and Converse shoes but only 20% for shoes in general, as there is competition already in Cirencester. Due to this, Emo-tion will only sell 'Emo' shoes.
Most of Emo-tion 's customers will be aged between 14 and 19. At peak times such as Christmas, we expect parents of this age group to purchase gifts from the shop.
The store would be contemporary in its looks. The front of the shop would change every month, as market research has shown this to be effective.
By requesting local students to fill out a questionnaire, we have been able to discover Emo-tion would be used most in the winter. This enables us to plan our launch for mid-autumn. This launch time will ensure the shop is operating efficiently when winter comes. Financial forecasts also take this into account.
There is no competition in the musical market in Cirencester. Some competition exists for shoes from Clarks - but Emo-tion offers shoes aimed directly at the age range of 14-19; no other shop does this in Cirencester.
In 5 years, no shop like Emo-tion has existed, apart from Willow which served the female 14-19 group.
Competition in the same areas of Emo-tion would pose a possible threat. Thought has been given to ways to reduce this threat and one of the most favourable ways to do this was through a customer loyalty card. This card would act differently to most, instead of saving points and then being able to spend them on products in the store, our card would simply hold the total an individual had spent in Emo-tion and give discounts on most products on a sliding scale. This way if another shop did open up, customers would continue shopping in Emo-tion.
We believe this will retain customer loyalty in the event competition opens up in the area. It will also increase customer satisfaction and keep customers coming back into store. This will help drive footfall, making any advertising in-store more effective.
The cost for this is not included in the forecasts, as it could be withdrawn at any time.
The target customers will be reached in 3 different ways:
In-store magazine - aimed at 'browsers'.
Advertisements in NME magazine - 50% of 16-24 year olds read it (Source, Forrester 2002).
Advertisements will also be placed around the local college and music events.
Many shops in Cirencester are aimed at 'new money' people - the target group for Emo-tion does not fall into this category. This will be reflected in out pricing policy, aiming to give value for money and match similar shop in the nearby towns of Gloucester, Cheltenham and Swindon. A price promise will be set up along the lines of "We check the prices in nearby towns so you do n't have to".
Our advertising strategy will be curiosity. The first phase (before opening) adverts will contain a photo of a product, the logo for Emo-tion and underneath the phrase '"Follow your..." This will generate curiosity into the company but offer no extra information.
The second phase (just before launch) will let people know where we are, but not what we do. This will maintain any interest the customer has, and encourage them to come and find us.
The third phase (after launch) will inform customers of 'deals' within the store. This advertising will continue to be 'minimal' and should always leave small bits of information out to drive footfall into the store.
Emo-tion will have a typical retail based returns policy, no return on sale stock. Full money back if goods are faulty.
Emo-tion would be placed on the primary shopping street in Cirencester; 'Cricklade Street'. Research shows that this street is the most popular amongst shoppers.
The premises would be leased at a cost of around   20,000 (Source: Council). The shop floor would have a capacity of about 64m 2 and stock space of about 80m 2.
We predict our future needs to remain constant; if more space is needed a space could be rented nearby.
There will be one back office computer from which all cash/management software will be run. It will have a link to the till so we can track all stock movements. All stock will be wholesaled in; no manufacturing is necessary.
Managers would have the majority of control in the running of the shop. This covers advertising and stock. Managers would have sole control over personnel within the company. has 3 years retail experience, covering advertising and customer service. He aspires to be an innovative leader within a national company.
He has a natural ability to make people feel at ease and maximize their potential. He is great at communicating and has a positive look on life. is  's father and has 16 years experience running his own business. This makes him an ideal team member in the company. He has been involved in designing accounting software, so there will be no dependence on outside accountants. has also been involved with till software, making him the perfect person to get Emo-tion up and trading quickly. and will be using   6000 of their own money to get Emo-tion started, showing a large commitment to the company.
While and have many skills, the team is lacking in an 'envisioner'. Some thought will be given to employing somebody with an ability to come up with new and exciting ideas for the company.
If Emo-tion proves to be very successful and the need for more than one store arises, a head office will need to be created, separate from the stores.
In the company 's forecasted financial information, increased sales figures have been used in the winter months, due to research mentioned above.
The biggest contributor to the company 's profit is Group 6 - Shoes. The reason for this is they have the biggest profit margin - nearly 73%. In the first year, a net profit before tax of   25,465 is predicted.
If the requested capital of   4000 is invested into the company, funds will always be in the black - due to the high turnover of the retail industry.
The grouping of products in the shop makes break-even analysis a little unclear. Some assumptions have to be made as to how much each group contributes to the overall sales. (See break-even analysis spreadsheet).
Below are the sales needed to reach break even:
These sales amount to   103,294, so certain leeway can be given to each group, as long as this target is reached.
Using the realistic forecasts, Emo-tion has a net profit margin of 16% for year 1 and 20% for year 2. Effective cost management could make this margin even higher.
Investors will be pleased to know Emo-tion has a return on capital employed percentage of 71.8, and gearing at start-up of 40%. This gearing quickly falls to 7.4% after year 1; proving Emo-tion would be a great investment opportunity.
The worst case forecast included in the appendix is the worst case. The position of the shop on one of the busiest streets in Cirencester almost guarantees custom.
Every week some analysis of the business would take place. Constant target refreshes for staff and management would reduce the risk of underselling. This would also highlight any failing areas of the business which would enable us to minimise loss and any further risk quickly.
If the forecasted sales are realised, the company stands to make nearly   30,000 every year. For a relatively small investment at the start, the investor could see a return of nearly 10 times over 3 years.
The assumptions on which revenue, overheads and cash flow are based are as follows:
