The idea of affirmative action programmes (AAPs) in India is now firmly entrenched and rooted in the collective conscious of the nation as well as in the volatile political landscape of public policy. Despite the recent protests over the expansion of reservation policy to include other backward classes, it is well-known that affirmative action as a government policy in India is there to stay. This Paper examines the feasibility of the expansion of AAPs in India, and whether the question of 'creamy layer' should be considered in greater detail than it is done by the present political establishment. In December 2006, the Indian legislature passed a bill reserving 27% seats for Other Backward Classes (OBC) in Central Government-aided higher educational institutions, notwithstanding huge protests and objections against the said proposal by the students and many political theorists. The question is should more castes and communities be included in the quotas in educational and professional institutions, especially when even in the prevalent system, quotas are not implemented properly and are not benefiting those who indeed need them the most.
The philosophical justification of AAP is based on the rectification and redressal of past or historical wrongs like the caste system in India, slavery and discrimination against coloured people in USA, apartheid in South Africa etc. It is also an aspect of reparative justice, i.e., compensation for past atrocities, and has become an integral part of the notion of 'justice'. Iris Marion Young opines that the "proponents of broad affirmative action policies often find themselves in this dilemma since they believe that the primary principle of justice at stake is a principle of non-discrimination. But oppression, not discrimination, is the primary concept for naming groups-related injustice. So affirmative action policies need not be seen as an exception to the principle of non-discrimination. Thus, if discrimination serves the purpose of undermining the oppression of a group, it may not only be permitted, but morally required".
Iris Marion Young, Justice and the Politics of Difference(1990) Princeton University Press, at p. 194-195.
The main argument against AAP lies in the intergenerational nature of the problem. The commonsensical 'grudge' against AAP happens to be: Just because my forefathers had oppressed and discriminated against certain groups of people, why should I be held responsible for the past injustices and be made to compensate for the same? This becomes acute in cases wherein person/s committing the past atrocities cannot even be traced after the passage of time and therefore making it difficult to hold someone accountable for the former acts. This tendency to compensate only the victims who have suffered discrimination, whether in the past or present, is a product of the theory of individual rights which has mostly dominated the western conception of rights and justice without taking into account any possibility of group rights. In Bernard R. Boxill 's view, "claims can be inherited, thus overcoming the generation gap created by individual rights discourse." However, this has been criticised as too broad and vague since "claims are not merely inherited, they are also interrelated as a group or unit. It is the deprivation which connects the generation, it is not genetic; the connection lies not so much in nature as in nurture".
Bernard R. Boxill, "The Morality of Reparation" in Barry R. Gross (ed.) Reverse Discrimination (1977), Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books at p. 244-46.
Arvind Sharma, Reservation and Affirmative Action: Models of Social Integration in India and the United States (2005) Sage Publications India Private Limited, New Delhi at p. 124.
Moreover, AAP is also criticised on the grounds of dilution of 'merit' and promoting 'inefficiency'. If certain disadvantaged people are given special leverage in educational institutions and relaxation of marks in competitive exams like engineering, medicine etc then it goes against the criteria of merit since less meritorious students get admitted on the basis of their caste identities. However, 'merit' is not a static element which is genetically inherited but is a  'social construct' i.e., a product of environmental factors like family background, school education, financial resources, etc. So equality does not mean only formal equality but substantive equality, i.e. everything being equal, two people are to be judged on an equal basis but when inequality exists, there needs to be unequal criteria.
Thus, if AAP is considered as a part of reparative justice, then the question of departure from the principle of equality does not arise, since justice should not only be construed as a juridical concept but also as a political concept. Iris Marin Young calls this problem the "impossibility of impartiality. Any attempt to reduce the task of defining justice to a procedure is inherently flawed as it is impossible for the person to construct the procedure in a way that is certain not to reflect his or her social location". However, this approach of political justice and disregarding any juridical notions of justice has been criticised by Melissa Williams on the ground that "the formal protections that form a part of a system of justice-in the form of settled procedural norms giving equal weight to individuals in the process of decision making, protecting rights, etc-are especially important to members of marginalised groups for symbolic as well as protective reasons. So politicizing the domain of justice does not mean abandoning altogether the rule of law, proceduralism, or rights".
Iris Marion Young, Justice and the Politics of Difference (1990) Princeton: Princeton University Press at p. 229-249.
Melissa Williams, "Justice Toward Groups: Political Not Juridical" (1995) 23(1) Political Theory at p. 83.
Any attempt to elucidate on the concept on the distributive justice would be incomplete without mentioning John Rawls' A Theory of Justice, wherein he "envisaged an 'original position' in which members of that society initially did not have any idea how they might end up once the 'veil of ignorance is lifted'. In such a situation, Rawls argued that all members would accept a dispensation which made special provision for the disadvantaged and that social and economic inequalities are to be so arranged that they are to the greatest benefit to the least advantaged". In this process, the issue is whether Rawls would have advocated for affirmative action with regard to notions of reparative justice? This has been explained by Janna Thompson who uses Rawls' conception of distributive justice to justify reparation claims for victims of historical wrongs. According to Rawls, at the original position, not 'individuals but representatives of family lines' would make sure that at least for 2 generations, inheritance can be passed over out of concerns of love and well-being for their children. Thompson extends this right to family inheritance to several generations since the family lines are not just about generations but form an important part of the family history, hence making these bequests integral to family legacy and in the formation of the individual 's identity.
John Rawls, A Theory of Justice (1971) Harvard University Press at p .29.
Janna Thompson, "Historical Injustice and Reparations: Justifying Claims of Descendents" (2001) 112 Ethics at p. 132-134.
The evolution of AAP has a long chequered history in both United States and India wherein its justification has constantly been debated and contested. In the U.S. the term 'affirmative action' was first used in 1961 in an executive order issued by the late President John F. Kennedy in order to urge the contractors to take affirmative action to employ all candidates. In 1964, the Civil Rights Act was passed to eliminate discrimination in employment and various measures were undertaken to improve the socio-economic conditions of the Afro-American population which was approved in Bakke vs. University of California, Davis,(1978) where the Supreme Court decided in favour of affirmative action but rejected the implementation of strict quotas in the college admissions and observed that "the attainment of a diverse student body clearly is a constitutionally permissible goal for an institution of higher education".
Terry H. Anderson, "The Strange Career of Affirmative Action" (2005) 22.2 South Central Review at p. 114 (1978) 438 US 265.
Terry H. Anderson, "The Strange Career of Affirmative Action" (2005) 22.2 South Central Review at p. 121.
In the U.S., "while AAPs are required for government contractors (public and private), the adoption of AAPs is voluntary for most other organisations since the structure of AAPs involves a system of goals and timetables with specific identification of the problem areas". Also, the major universities like Yale, Harvard, Stanford, etc have long followed AAPs to encourage coloured students for opportunity enhancement resulting in a significant diversity in the composition of the students' body and also providing considerable prospects for individual and economic growth of the students. In contrast, in India, there are a fixed number of quotas mandated by the Constitution for the disadvantaged groups including Schedules Castes (SCs), Scheduled Tribes (STs), socially and educationally backward classes (SEBCs) and the Other Backward Classes (OBCs). Though recently instituted, South Africa is also actively implementing AAPs in the areas of education, employment, housing etc for the majority black population who were hitherto denied any socio-economic opportunities in the apartheid era but it is too early to comment on the effectiveness of the said policies.
Gwendolyn M. Combs and Sucheta Nadkarni, "The tale of two cultures: Attitudes towards affirmative action in the United States and India" (2005) 40 Journal of World Business at p. 160.
In India, in addition to the constitutionally mandated 22.5% quotas reserved for the SCs and the STs, the current UPA government has passed a bill implementing 27% quotas for the OBCs in the central government aided institutions of higher education following the recommendations of the Mandal Commission in 1980 thereby reserving a total of 49.5% of the seats for the backward classes and castes. Predictably, it was criticised for promoting 'caste politics' and deemed as an extremely divisive measure which would divide the society on the basis of caste identities as if they already did n't exist! In the midst of this upper caste hysteria, the real issue was somewhere lost, that of providing equal opportunities to all sections of people and to eliminate discrimination and structural disabilities of the impoverished sections. Admittedly, reservation is not the only method of creating an equitable society but it is one of the workable models and has been functioning though not with complete success in a hierarchical, caste-ridden society like India for long. It is no doubt that the policy has been implemented in a faulty manner and should have been much more effective if adopted properly but this loophole cannot not overshadow the efficacy of the policy per se.
According to social scientists like Andre Beteille, Pratap Bhanu Mehta, etc the purpose of reservations in favour of backward communities has become meaningless since it is consistently used by the politicians to enlarge their vote banks by including more and more castes into the ambit of the quota system. Also, the most deprived sections lack the basic necessities of life and, in effect, cannot take advantage of the reservation policy whose benefits are largely cornered by the economically advanced groups of the backward castes thereby totally nullifying the intention of the said policy. Thus, instead of providing caste-based reservations, the government should provide economic incentives, interest free loans, free primary education, employment schemes etc to improve the socio-economic conditions of the backward communities. However, others argue that instead of abolishing the policy altogether, the Government can put a clause debarring the non-deserving candidates from the ambit of reservation. The Supreme Court has also limited the extent of quotas to 50% of the total seats of any educational institution thereby creating a reservation policy whose benefits would percolate down to the socially and educationally most backward classes and castes.
In the recent expansion of quotas to OBCs, it was contended that since there was no appropriate data about the exact number of OBC population in the country, how did the government reach the figure of 27% quotas for them, as quotas are normally demographically proportionate to the present population of the respective communities? According the Mandal Commission Report submitted in 1980 (which was set up to determine the criteria for defining SEBCs and to recommend steps for the advancement of SEBCs), the OBC population including both Hindus and non-Hindus constituted of 52% of India 's total population, but it recommended 27% quotas for them due to the Supreme Court directive of 50% maximum quota. However, this was criticised as being too large and not representative of the actual population of OBCs since it was arrived at without any Census data to indicate the caste of citizens. Hence the figure of 52% OBC population remained disputed till recently when the latest expansion of reservations took place. Thus, according to Jayati Ghosh, "there is a case for a systematic survey and assessment of the current social context, which would allow for a more systematic listing of other backward classes, avoiding as far as possible the errors of unjustified inclusion or unfair exclusion".
Arvind Sharma, Reservation and Affirmative Action: Models of Social Integration in India and the United States (2005) Sage Publications India Private Limited, New Delhi at p. 151.
Jayati Ghosh, "Case for Caste based Quotas in Higher Education" (2006) Economic and Political Weekly 17 June at p. 2431.
The issue of 'creamy layer' has been the most contentious debate in the entire discourse of reservations in India. It is argued that class and not caste should be the criteria of reservation since not all forward caste people are economically well-off and do n't have access to socio-economic resources in order to live fulfilling lives while not all people belonging to backward castes suffer from economic deprivation and lack of adequate opportunities. Within the constitutional mandate of reservation based on castes, it is contended that economically privileged sections or the 'creamy layer' should be kept out of the quotas since they can compete on their own. Yogendra Yadav and Satish Deshpande have proposed an alternative model of affirmative action "which not only acknowledged caste disadvantages but also gender and class inequalities by clearly linking caste identities to measurable empirical indicators of disadvantage inorder to de-essentialise caste" and to focus attention on other socio-economic indicators to determine the same.
Yogendra Yadav and Satish Deshpande, "Redesigning Affirmative Action: Castes and Benefits in Higher Education" (2006) Economic and Political Weekly 17 June at p. 2424.
Hence, in any formulation of AAPs, the question of 'creamy layer' is to be kept in mind since it should not be used as political instrument to satisfy competing caste interests. Thus, the government can limit access to quotas in educational institutions and government jobs to one-two generations only wherein the family would be sufficiently uplifted through AAPs and afterwards, their descendents would not entitled to reserved quotas and would have to compete with general category students. Further, children of IAS, IPS and Class I officers of the backward castes should be kept out of the purview since they have received similar education and other opportunities as others.
Though the question of 'creamy layer' is confined to economically advantaged sections amongst the backward classes, it is noted that social discrimination does not cease with upward economic mobility as caste discrimination is still rampant in all levels of society, both rural and urban areas and that AAPs can only help to an extent alleviate the conditions of the impoverished sections but cannot change hostile societal attitudes. In Upendra Baxi 's opinion, if one talks about justice from the perspective of prejudice then reservation policy should be eternal since caste discrimination in India originated 5000 years back and its removal in terms of customs and behaviour would take another 10,000 years! So the government needs to formulate such AAPs which would eliminate structural disabilities that characterise the present social structure in terms of equitable distribution of social, economic and cultural resources and hope that prevalence of these policies would remove age-old societal prejudices also.
Class Discussions in module 'Approaches to Global Justice', LLM in IDLHR, University of Warwick, 2006-2007 batch.
The Indian Judiciary has had a contentious relation with the constitutionally prescribed AAPs being implemented by the State legislature from time to time whose validity stems from two Articles of the Constitution:
Though Article 15 deals with prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth, etc, Art. 15(4) states that.
Similarly, Article 16 deals with equality of opportunity and non-discrimination in matters of public employment but Art.16 (4) provides that.
Thus, Arts 15(4) and 16(4) of the Constitution form the crux of the AAPs in India and have undergone various and often conflicting interpretations by the Supreme Court. In M.R. Balaji vs. State of Mysore, the Court observed that Arts 15(4) and 16(4) are enabling provisions with the object of achieving equality before law and equal protection of laws as enshrined in Art.14 but it warned the government against excessive reservation and to uphold public interest by maintaining efficiency in professional and technical education. But this was reversed in State of Kerala vs. N. M. Thomas wherein it was held that Art.16 (4) is not an exception to Art. 16(1) and (2) but a categorical assertion that equality of opportunity could be carried to the extent of making reservations. (1963) AIR SC 649.
Parmanand Singh, "Fundamental Right to Reservation: A Rejoinder" (1995) 3 SCC (Jour) 6 at p. 3. (1976) 2 SCC 310.
Parmanand Singh, "Fundamental Right to Reservation: A Rejoinder" (1995) 3 SCC (Jour) 6 at p. 3.
This controversy was laid to rest by a 9-bench decision of the Supreme Court in Indra Sawhney v. Union of India wherein the decision in Thomas' case was reversed and it was held that Arts 15(4) and 16(4) were only enabling provisions and did n't provide a fundamental right to reservations and viewed that no preferences for the backward groups would be constitutionally permissible under Article 16(1) since clause(4) exhausts all power of backward class preferences.. Thus, it was opined that "Art. 16(1) is a fundamental right whereas Art. 16(4) is an obligation of the State." Further, the court set the limit of maximum 50% quotas in institutions of education and employment and also held that reservations in super speciality courses like PG medicine, technical and sophisticated forms of engineering, etc are not permissible. 1992 Supp. (3) SCC 217.
Ibid. at p. 3.
Moreover, the judiciary has also disagreed with the government 's attempt to introduce quota in private-unaided higher educational institutions. In P.A. Inamdar vs. State of Maharashtra, the Court held that efforts to implement quotas in private educational institutions constitute an encroachment into the rights of the private individuals to set up institutions of higher learning and the State has no power to force them to enforce quotas resulting in the passing of 93 rd Constitutional Amendment (2005) by the parliament providing a sub-clause (5) to Art. 15 of the Constitution stating that "nothing in this article or in sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of article 19 shall prevent the State from making any special provision, by law, for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in so far as such special provisions relate to their admission to educational institutions including private educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by the State, other than the minority educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of article 30.". (2005) 6 SCC 537.
In the end, it can be said that AAPs whether as a means of social justice or as a mechanism of 'vote bank politics' have become endemic to the Indian socio-political structure and one can only device methods to make it more efficient and well-organised in order to avoid creating undue fissures and caste hostilities in the societal fabric. Though the basic premise of AAPs is to uplift the conditions of SEBCs, it should even strive to accommodate people and communities who are impoverished not only due to their castes but also due to their gender, regions, race, class, sexual orientation etc. In this context, the question of 'creamy layer' becomes important to consider since all efforts should made to execute AAPs among caste and communities who deserve the most. The Government should appoint requisite social and political scientists to find out the exact empirical data of people who are living below the poverty line in addition to other socio-economic indicators along with their caste denominations in order to discover the correct castes and communities who require reservations. Also, attempts to use AAPs for pure electoral gains should be thwarted and should not be extended to each and every caste significant for political interests. Thus, "one needs to demonstrate in an open and accountable fashion that affirmative action is not about 'appeasement' of particular castes or communities but about abolishing continuing sources of tangible disadvantage in our unequal and unjust society". With the latest debates of reservations in the private sector as well as for the Muslim community in India, the AAP needs a hard look and rigorous analysis about its implication and relevance for the future generations.
Yogendra Yadav and Satish Deshpande, "Redesigning Affirmative Action: Castes and Benefits in Higher Education" (2006) Economic and Political Weekly 17 June at p. 2424 ___________________________.
