Shifting patterns of health and illness have brought chronic illness to the forefront of medical sociological debate in post-Second World War industrialised societies (Bury, 1997). The fall of infectious diseases, such as TB and cholera, together with an increased life expectancy for men and women, has meant that the proportion of the population surviving into middle and later life has increased, with some sixteen per cent of the population now over the retirement age (Bury, 1997). Associated with this demographic change has been the rise of degenerative health disorders amongst the ageing population. Conditions such as arthritis, stroke and Parkinson 's disease, all major sources of disability, have now thoroughly displaced infectious diseases, and made chronic illness an anticipated, if not expected, aspect of the life course in modern societies (Williams, 2003). Pound et al 's (1998) study of the experience of stroke amongst elderly working class people in the East End of London, for example, revealed that there was a great degree of acceptance that illness was an inevitable and unavoidable facet of growing old.
Sociological interest in chronic illness has developed from many different levels. The inability of medicine to provide 'cures' or appropriate treatments for many chronic disorders has required an examination of the social sphere for answers to some of the problems and challenges chronic illness and disability poses (Bury, 1997). The recognition of chronic illness as having a significant social dimension, coupled with the redefinition of 'disability' as a social product (not a biophysical fact) by the disability movement, further sparked interest in, and demand for, sociological research into chronic disorders.
Aside from an acknowledgement of the social dimensions of chronic illness, Bury (1997) has pointed to changes in society at a cultural level that have prompted research into chronic conditions. A predictable and clearly defined life course, he argues, has resulted in an emphasis on life planning and self-identity, of which the body has become a crucial aspect. 'Cultural competence', in other words, the ability to portray oneself as possessing agency and competence in a wide variety of cultural settings, he argues, has become a crucial component of identity in modern society. This identity can be threatened and displaced by the onset of chronic illness. In this way, chronic illness can be seen to be of great sociological interest as it.
Early sociological responses to studying chronic illness tended to focus on Parsonian sick role theory and labelling perspectives which conceptualised illness as a form of deviance (Williams, 2003). However, more recent approaches have turned their attention to the way in which social stability and order is maintained through interaction in the presence of chronic illness. Building on the work of Strauss and Glaser 's (1967) work within the grounded theory tradition, sociological research on chronic illness has emerged that emphasises the 'interactional difficulties' (Bury, 1997) and negotiated aspects of managing a chronic condition. It is from within this interactionist tradition of exploring meaning and experience in relation to chronic illness that Bury 's (1982) concept of 'biographical disruption' can be situated. 'Biographical disruption' is a term utilised by Bury to describe a multi-faceted effect of, and response to, chronic illness. Although illness is often an anticipated occurrence during the life course in a culture based on the idea that we can expect to live long and healthy lives, chronic illness can emerge as a disruption to usual life expectations,.
The biographical disruption of chronic illness to a person 's life involves different sorts of meanings and experiences for the sufferer, as the person attempts to make sense of, and makes practical and psychological adjustments to, the physical consequences of illness. Bury has termed these the consequences and the significance of chronic illness. This essay will assess Bury 's (1982) notion of 'biographical disruption' and assess how far it can illuminate the reality of meaning and experience of chronic illness.
If we are to understand chronic illness as 'biographical disruption', we have to presume there are underlying generally understood ideas about what constitutes a healthy life-course. Indeed, as Giddens (1979, cited in Bury, 1982) has noted, it is the disruption itself which reveals the taken-for-granted assumptions in everyday routine settings. Chronic illness exposes the sufferer to worlds of knowledge and experience outside of their own world of experience (Bury, 1997). These experiences, for example death, pain and suffering may be known only as distanced concepts or as realities belonging to others. Chronic illness, however, may bring these distanced ideas into reality for the sufferer, creating what Giddens has termed a 'critical situation', or a major disruptive experience. For Bury, there are three levels on which this disruption occurs: the first refers to the disruption of taken-for-granted assumptions as previously discussed, and a growing awareness of bodily states and experiences not normally encountered. The second aspect of biographical disruption refers to the way in which people make sense of these altered experiences; the stories they tell in order to rationalise them and the way in which they incorporate chronic illness into their lives, past, present and future. The final aspect of 'biographical disruption' as set out by Bury is the response to the chronic illness, in other words, the way in which the individual utilises resources in order to manage their altered situation.
From these three aspects, two forms of meaning about chronic illness can be drawn out; the consequences and the significance of chronic illness (Bury, 1997). The consequences of chronic illness refer to the experience of interruption that chronic illness causes to the life flow, whereas the significance of chronic illness refers to the 'deeper significance' the illness has for the person 's identity, particularly with regards to the  'symbolic significance' of the disease (Bury, 1997). The onset of a chronic illness can be a bewildering and anxious time, Bury argues, during which affected individuals may have to re-organise their lives around their symptoms and medical regimens. The individual is 'initiated' into a new social arena where common-sense guidelines are no longer applicable (Bury, 1982).
This sense of disorder is key to Bury 's notion of 'biographical disruption'. Chronic illness disrupts everyday life experiences; through bodily limitations, medical regimes and the social consequences of these interruptions, the life of the sufferer is radically transformed and re-negotiated.
Whilst the consequences and experiences of chronic illness may have common features (for example, limitations on abilities, degrees of physical discomfort and/or pain, medical interventions etc.), the significance and meaning the illness has for the individual concerned is much more varied (Bury, 1997). Here, the symbolic connotations of the disease may influence the way in which individuals regard their illness. Different conditions carry with them commonly held images and ideas about what both the disease is and what effect it has on the body. Bury 's (1982) interviews with people suffering from rheumatoid arthritis, for example, found that the image of arthritis as a condition affecting the elderly made the acceptance of the condition difficult for younger respondents as the condition seemed to entail a 'premature ageing' (Singer, 1974, cited in Bury, 1982),.
Indeed, the cultural imagery surrounding certain diseases and conditions may serve to further reinforce people 's anxieties and fears upon diagnosis. The language commonly used to describe cancer as a disease that 'eats away' at people, for example, may influence the meaning individuals attribute to their illness.
Aside from cultural imagery, the role of narrative is a further important aspect in the process of attributing meaning to chronic illness for sufferers themselves, and much research has been carried out in this area. Through constructing an account of what has happened, and why it has happened, 'it is possible to repair, or in some way incorporate, the threat posed to everyday routines and meanings' (Barnes et al, 1999). As Turner (2004) has argued, shared narratives of 'trouble' are important social supports for the self; biographical stories make sense of the world of disruptions and give meaning to experiences which are apparently meaningless and sporadic. He argues that not only do narratives allow people to construct their pasts in a meaningful way, they are also a means of providing hope for the future;.
Here, Turner argues that not only do narratives allow people to understand the 'here and now' aspects of their condition, it also enables them to account for the present and also to see themselves in the future, perhaps when illnesses have passed. Gareth Williams (1984) through the use of semi-structured interviews with 30 respondents diagnosed with Rheumatoid Arthritis, sought to understand the way in which these forms of narrative can be understood as an attempt to repair the ruptures between the body, self and society caused by chronic illness. If we are to understand chronic illness in terms of Bury 's notion of 'biographical disruption' and sufferers as  'social and historical agents with a biographical identity', then the narratives Williams analysed can be seen as tools to reconstruct a sense of order and self in the face of fragmentation and disorder (Williams, 1984).
Williams provides examples of the different ways in which this 'linking-up' of biographical aspects of individual 's lives helped sufferers of Rheumatoid Arthritis understand the aetiology of their condition and to see it in relation to their own personal histories. Bill, for example, one of Williams' interviewees, despite clinical perspectives on his arthritis, situated his illness as having developed out of his working life. Bill had worked as a 'gaffer' on a factory floor in a paperworks and attributed his symptoms to exposure to work place toxic chemicals. In this way, Williams argues, his understanding of his condition can only be understood in terms of his image of society as a place of exploitative power relations. Bill 's illness was submerged into a broader public issue, that of work health and safety, and the question which seemed to plague Bill, 'How the hell have I come to be like this?...because it is n't me' (Bill, cited in Williams, 1982: 184) became projected onto an analysis of the exploitative relationship between workers and their managers rather than residing solely within Bill 's own body or genetic heritage (Williams, 1984).
In further examples, Williams examines the way in which two women, Gill and Betty, construct the aetiology of their Rheumatoid Arthritis. For Gill, this narrative reconstruction related specifically to a 'web' of stressful and traumatic events in her life; her self 's relationship to the modern world. Betty, on the other hand, saw her illness in relation to God 's greater will. Despite the fact that Betty 's illness did cause disruption in terms of her socio-economic circumstances, what is significant about her case is that her chronic illness did not pose much of a threat to her sense of identity and her self; she did not have to reconstruct order through narrative in the same way that Gill and Bill did, for Betty, God transcends both the individual and society,.
In this way, Betty 's experiences can be seen to render the notion of narrative reconstitution redundant. Her life did not follow a 'narrative thread' as others did, which could be 'interrupted' at any point by a major disruptive event or happening, instead her life was constructed in the broader picture of 'God 's purpose', where all happenings could be necessitated and justified by reference to 'her intrinsic relationship to a suffering God' (Williams, 1984: 198).
An examination of the role of 'narrative' is important in relation to the notion of 'biographical disruption' as it reveals the complex and varied way in which meaning is established in the lives of individuals following disturbance by chronic illness. Thus far, examination has focused primarily on the way in which individuals 'make sense of' their conditions, and reconstruct meanings around it. However, a further important aspect of the notion of 'biographical disruption' includes what Corbin and Strauss (1991, cited in Bury, 1997) term 'comeback'. The term 'comeback' refers to the physical and biographical processes involved in achieving a satisfactory standard of life in the face of chronic illness, and have been summarised by Bury (1991) in terms of coping, strategy and style. 'Coping' is a term used by Bury (1997) to describe a range of adaptive behaviours, including practical and emotional strategies which help people to 'put up' with chronic illness. A number of studies have been conducted into the factors which affect the ability to make these adaptive changes to an altered identity and to the potential loss of bodily capabilities. The process of 'normalisation', whether this be physically, through the disguising of bodily symptoms, or psychologically whereby the illness is separated off as distinct from a person 's sense of self (perhaps facilitated by medical definitions of disease (Bury, 1982)), has been noted as important way in which chronic illness is managed. However, the degree to which 'normalisation' can be an effective means of coping with illness has been seen to be influenced by the severity of the condition in question; indeed, the more severe the bodily symptoms, the more difficult it may be for the individual to ignore, subvert or 'bracket' them off, as Bury (1982) notes some of his respondents were simply 'taken over' by the disease. Indeed, there may be a contradiction between separating the self from the disease, and yet feeling its effects pervading all aspects of life (Bury, 1982). Murphy (1987) has referred to this state of limbo as  'social suspension' whereby people with impairments are neither wholly in nor out of society, where old statuses and have been lost, with nothing to replace them.
This concern with 'coping' in many ways overlaps with Bury 's notion of  'strategies'. Here, Bury examines what individuals actually do in order to manage chronic illness, as opposed to the ways in which they 'come to terms' with it. This includes the 'mobilisation of resources', i.e. the material and social resources available to overcome the effects of chronic illness. Studies have revealed the great importance of social networks as a source of social and moral support through the experience of chronic illness. Indeed, the 'tolerance' of surrounding people may be tested during periods of worsening symptoms or increased dependency, as respondents to Williams' (1993) study described it as finding out who your friends 'really are'. Maintaining jobs together with 'keeping up appearances' socially, were mentioned by Bury 's (1982) respondents as areas which proved more difficult with the onset of their symptoms. Some respondents actively withdrew from situations and environments in which their illness would prove obtrusive or awkward, whilst others experienced frustration and embarrassment at their inability to 'keep up',.
Having resources to call upon therefore, whether social or otherwise, upon the onset of chronic illness, is a crucial aspect of an individual 's adjustment to their biographical disruption. Whilst problems with social interaction, for example, may not result directly form the inability to perform certain tasks or activities, the attitudes and actions of others may have an important influence not only on the capacity of the individual to maintain a good standard of living, but also on the way in which the individual comes to perceive their illness and ultimately their sense of self.
The final aspect Bury (1997) sets out is that of style. By  'style' Bury refers to the adoption of a form of self-presentation in illness or disability, and the 'performance' that is required to maintain active participation in mainstream life. In other words, in order to resolve what Radley (1994: 152, cited in Bury, 1997) has referred to as the 'competing demands of bodily symptoms, and those of society', a form of 're-fashioning' of the self has to take place so that social relationships and also the relationship to self is kept in tact. Bury argues that the degree to which this re-fashioning of self, and the adoption of a lifestyle which allows the individual to regard themselves as 'capable' is closely tied up with levels of individual confidence, the anticipated responses of others together with the availability of resources to tackle them.
As examined, Bury 's notion of 'biographical disruption' provides us with a framework with which to analyse the meaning and experience of chronic illness; from the way in which people attribute meaning to their altered physical and social status, to the way in which this meaning translates into social actions and attitudes. As chronic illness is often  'suffered in silence' in the private realm, the sociology of chronic illness as well as that of disability has done much to illuminate and shed light on these experiences, and to give voice to those who might otherwise be silenced (Williams, 2003). The concept of 'biographical disruption' can be seen therefore to be an important instrumentally to the study of chronic illness, providing a lens through which such meanings and experiences can be examined in a meaningful way. However, the idea of 'biographical disruption' has been criticised on many different levels and on various grounds.
One of the major criticisms levelled at the concept of 'biographical disruption' stems from the disability movement. Whilst chronic illness does not necessarily involve disability and vice versa, G.Williams (1996) and Bury (1997) have pointed to the overlap between chronic illness and impairment. Indeed, the majority of cases of impairment in contemporary society are linked to chronic illness, and most people can expect to experience impairment at some point in their lives (Barnes et al, 1999). However, medical sociology 's exploration of the experiences of the 'impaired body' has attracted criticism from the disability movement. Disability theorists and activists have, since the 1960s, attempted to redefine disability and to remove it from medical and 'personal tragedy' models which had, until then, prevailed. Given academic credibility by Vic Finkelstein (1980) and Michael Oliver (1990), the social model of disability attempted to reshape the dominant notion of disability as a 'medical tragedy' to a social issue. Traditionally, disability has been understood as a pre-social phenomenon, and one best understood by the disciplines of medicine and psychology (Paterson and Hughes, 2000). It is this view of disability which is deemed to underline the World Health Organisation 's (1980) model of impairments, disabilities and handicaps. Writers such as Oliver (1990) have fiercely attacked such definitions, and sociological work stemming from it, on the grounds that it is complicit with medical definitions of disability. Rather than being a personal limitation of the body or an unfortunate twist of fate, disability is redefined by the social model of disability as a situation produced by a social and spatial environment that fails to acknowledge the needs and rights of people with impairments (Oliver, 1990). The sort of approach which is evident in the notion of 'biographical disruption' has been dismissed as self-indulgent and as reinforcing 'tragic' stereotypes of disabled people. Through distancing itself from the social world and focusing on how individuals re-work their lives and sense of identity after the 'tragic' onset of chronic illness or disability, the notion of 'biographical disruption', it is argued, falls into the trap of colluding with medicalised definitions of disability and chronic illness (Barnes et al, 1999).
Whilst the social model of disability highlights the social dimension of disability and chronic illness, the issue of the impaired body remains a contentious issue amongst disability theorists. Indeed, through focussing entirely on the social arena, the impaired body is almost entirely excluded from the social model of disability. In many ways, Hughes and Paterson (1997) have argued, the social model of disability and the medical model converge over the issue of the body; both treat it as 'a pre-social, inert, physical object, as discrete, palpable and separate from the self' (Hughes and Paterson, 1997: 329),.
Writers such as Hughes and Paterson (1997) have argued that the impaired body should be regarded as more than just a medical issue: to claim otherwise is to deny the body meaning and history. On the basis of such arguments, there have been calls to 'bring back' the impaired body into the social model of disability, as both a site of meaningful experience and also discursive construction. Morris (1991), for example, argues that a feminist perspective is crucial in bringing the embodied experience of the impairment back onto the disability agenda,.
These debates surrounding the impaired body and the social model of disability have led writers within the field of disability to call for a model which takes into consideration both the personal and physical side of disability (Shakespeare and Erickson, 2000, cited in Williams, 2003).
Aside from collusions with medicalised versions of chronic illness, further attacks have been launched on the underlying principles of Bury 's notion of 'biographical disruption'. Kelly and Field (1998), for example, have called into question the 'orderly, enduring and predictable social world' in which chronic illness is regarded as a social or symbolic 'pathogen'. The notion of biographical disruption, they argue, assumes a priori a sufficient stability to be upset, and furthermore a Cartesian notion of self to be objectified, which, they argue, in a post-modern society no longer holds true. The advent of a post-modern society that celebrates disorderliness and the impossibility of anything other than 'imperfect and temporary structures of meaning', suggests identity has become a fluid and ever-changing venture (Kelly and Field, 1998). Reflexivity has displaced pre-given, socially scripted roles and identities, with individuals constructing their lifestyles and self-concepts around a broad range of sources,.
In light of this argument, Kelly and Field interestingly highlight the possibility of chronic illness, rather than being a source of disruption and disorder, potentially acting as an anchor of stability in an inherently unstable world. Through problematising the notion of a continuous and predictable life-course, Kelly and Field set out the possibility of chronic illness offering people a more grounded sense of identity and continuity in an already disjointed and fundamentally unstable world.
The notion of 'biographical disruption' has furthermore been called into question by studies which have emphasised differing ways in which chronic illness can be experienced and made meaningful, taking issue with the idea that chronic illness is necessarily a disruptive event in the life-course. Indeed, Pound et al 's (1998) study of the nature and experience of stroke victims in the East End of London provides an interesting example of the way in which chronic illness can be seen not as a disruption to a stable life, but instead as a continuation of already testing circumstances. The elderly respondents to the study, contrary to the idea that chronic illness causes a major crisis in people 's lives, appeared to take stroke 'in their stride', seeing it as 'not that bad' (Pound et al, 1998). The authors argue that age is an important mediating process in this response to chronic illness: surviving into old age had equipped Pound et al 's respondents with the wherewithal and skills to adapt to new situations and circumstances (Pound et al, 1998). This study introduces a different response to chronic illness; that it can be an expected or anticipated event, and even that its disruption may not be felt as severely as Bury suggests. Williams (2003), taking this idea forward, has posed the question as to whether biographic disruption can be considered a pervasive feature of living in modernity where 'reflexivity and risk abound'. Indeed, in modern societies where uncertainty risk have become 'chronic' (Giddens, 1990, cited in Williams, 2003), we can no longer take our bodies and selves as given,.
Our bodies and ourselves, according to Williams, are continuously problematised from a variety of discourses, for example through health promotion, television and self-help books, so that our notions of self, body and identity are continually disturbed, re-assessed and re-worked. This situation has been noted by Williams (2003) as being more pervasive amidst the 'worried well' middle classes for whom health and self-development have become somewhat of an obsession. Crawford 's (1985) interviews for example, noted the ways in which, through an internalisation of middle class values, respondents had an anxious concern with 'health' as something to be actively achieved through health promotion behaviours e.g. exercise.
Further problems with the notion of biographic disruption have been documented by Kelly and Field (1998), who point to expanding boundaries of what is deemed 'normal' in contemporary society to question the inevitability of chronic illness causing biographical disruption. A recognition of a broad range of acceptable lifestyles and experiences may limit the degree of 'disruption' caused by chronic illness. Indeed, it is argued, a shift towards a cultural milieu where 'anything goes' and difference, whether bodily or socially, has come to be celebrated rather than mistrusted and ostracised, may minimise the disruptive impact of illness. In a similar vein, they argue that the development of medical technologies has also meant that people 's experiences of chronic illness may not be as devastating to the life course as perhaps they once were. Medical interventions indeed can be seen to keep chronic illness 'at arm 's length' and minimise the degree to which they intrude on the lives and identities of the people in question (Kelly and Field, 1998). These points, contrary to the idea that chronic illness ruins lives, point to cultural and technological changes which can potentially minimise the disruption chronic illness causes, perhaps supporting the idea of biographical continuation as opposed to disruption.
A further differing response to chronic illness has been documented by Carricaburu and Pierret 's (1995) study of HIV positive homosexual and haemophiliac men. The study revealed that these men, rather than experiencing their immune status as biographically disruptive and as a threat to 'previously valued and taken-for-granted aspects of self' (Barnes et al, 1999: 49) instead re-worked their experience of being HIV positive into their previous identities, individual and collective. In this way, their chronic illness and uncertainty about their health status reaffirmed their previous struggles and identities rather than threatening them: for the haemophiliac men this was individual struggle with illness, for homosexual men, this meant collective and political struggle in terms of their identities as gay men. In this way, chronic illness was seen as biographically reinforcing rather than disruptive,.
This argument reveals the way in which, rather than displacing identity, chronic illness can in fact reinforce previous markers of identity, thus unsettling the notion of 'biographic disruption'.
Further important reflections have been made by Williams (2003). In his analysis of biographic disruption, Williams highlights the way in which the utilisation of this notion purports an 'adult-centric model of illness'. That is, it assumes chronic illness is something which presents itself later in life. Whilst it holds true that there is a link between chronic illness and age, the way in which congenital abnormalities and illnesses acquired in childhood can be worked into a notion of 'biographical disruption' is uncertain. Indeed, can a chronic illness be described as disruptive if it has been present since birth and thus there was no previous life for it to disrupt? Perhaps 'biographical disruption' in this instance would refer to the way in which life experiences from birth would be somewhat different to the taken-for-granted assumptions about what constitutes a 'normal' i.e. healthy life.
Further to this, Williams (2003) points to the various potential gains or positive consequences of illness. Parsons (1951) clearly made reference to what he termed  'secondary gain' within the sick role, and the motivational aspect of this behaviour, and this is elaborated with regards to chronic illness. Williams (2003) makes reference to the moral dimensions of 'telling and bearing witness to illness', together with the possibility of obtaining pleasure directly or indirectly through pain, or expression of it,.
This is not to say that chronic illness does not involve physical suffering or hardship, rather Williams (2003) points to the way in which biographical disruption can be re-worked and transformed, bringing in the potential positives of chronic illness to the biographical disruption debate.
In conclusion, Bury 's notion of 'biographical disruption' is an important core concept in analysing both the meaning and experience of chronic illness, which has been useful in shedding light on, and giving voice to experiences and lives which may otherwise have remained silent. The notion is a useful starting point for looking at not only the nature of chronic illness, but also the coping strategies and responses it evokes. However, as identified, the implicit assumptions embedded within the concept have caused it to come under attack from several different angles. Firstly, its focus on the interruption and disruption of a continuous and established life course means that chronic illnesses acquired in early childhood or from birth are entirely excluded. Indeed, the meanings and experiences of such individuals, for whom chronic illness is an integral part of their biography from the beginning, may offer important insights, for example into the role chronic illness plays in shaping life patterns and choices (if at all), rather than disrupting those already in place. Similarly absent is a consideration of chronic illness as biographical continuity; in other words, chronic illness as just another phase in an already turbulent life-course, disrupted by various other hardships and disadvantages. Although such studies of biographical continuity have tended to focus on those from economically disadvantaged backgrounds (Pound et al, 1998), the status of biographical disruption as a pervasive feature of modern life for those of varying backgrounds has also been increasingly recognised (Williams, 2003). This begs the question of how far chronic illness can be seen to be any more of a disruption to life than other common life events, for example divorce or childbirth?.
The collusion with medicalised and 'personal tragedy' conceptions of disability have furthermore meant that the notion of biographical disruption has come under attack from disability theorists. Indeed, the word 'disruption' is loaded with negative connotations, and the presumption that chronic illness is a negative phenomenon, which shatters lives and forces people to gather up the pieces left of their selves and identities in an attempt to deal with their 'altered' (presumably worse) status, leaves us with a very negative portrayal of the experience of chronic illness and disability. Whilst Bury 's consideration of  'style' has dealt with the way in which chronic illness can be transformed from a negative to a positive experience through the utilisation of various coping strategies and lifestyles, so that the individual can shift from an image of 'the disabled self' to one of the 'capable self' (Corbin and Strauss, 1991, cited in Bury, 1997), the underlying assumption is that disability and chronic illness are necessarily negative experiences. It is this negative assumption about the lives and experiences of people with disabilities which many disability activists and theorists have sought to redress. Indeed, many studies have uncovered an improvement in self-concept following the onset of a chronic illness or disability, for example Bonwich 's (1985) study of spinal cord injured women who felt that their disability released them from  'stifling stereotypes' concerning women 's 'proper' role in society, and indeed, felt more positive and confident in their lives than prior to their accident. Williams (2003) also throws critical light onto the issue of pain, reminding us that this is not inherently a negative experience. Thus, the potential positive elements of chronic illness and disability need to be worked into the concept of biographical disruption in order to address the wide variety of ways in which they are experienced and made meaningful.
The question of the sequencing of biographical disruption in relation to chronic illness also opens up new avenues of sociological enquiry. Williams (2003), using the example of illness narratives, points to the possibility of biographical disruption 'precipitating or engendering (chronic) illness' (Williams, 2003: 110). As the example of 'Gill' in Williams (1984) reminds us, biographical disruption, in Gill 's case the death of her son and husband together with the departure of her daughter, can, in the face of chronic illness, be re-worked as attributing factors. Williams (2003) points out that such narratives provide another dimension to biographical disruption, moving beyond the consequences and significance of chronic illness, to a consideration of the causation or 'aetiological links' (Williams, 2003: 107), thus far resolutely absent in the concept of biographical disruption.
Thus, temporal and contextual considerations become crucial to the notion of biographical disruption; the point in the lifecourse at which the illness occurs together with the context of the individual 's life and circumstances has called for perhaps a revision of the concept of biographical disruption (Williams, 2003). Although the concept gives voice to a range of responses to, and experiences of, chronic illness, which is of fundamental importance given their often private nature, there are still serious omissions, and perhaps a greater consideration of context and life circumstances will allow for the exploration of other ways of 'doing' and experiencing chronic illness in contemporary society, other than as purely a disruption to individual biography.
