The Great Depression following the 1929 Wall Street Crash devastated both the European and American economies leaving millions facing destitution and unemployment. Among these were many workers both skilled and unskilled who were unable to support their families and heavily reliant on the state for support. Working-class pressure in this context mainly constitutes Trade Union groups and Left-leaning political parties that claim to represent working-class interests. Nonetheless, as Salter (Salter and Stevenson 1990) argues there is a distinction between the attitudes and behaviour of working-class members and the organisations that purport to represent them. Moreover, working-class expression is more than just the Trade Unions or Social Democratic parties; it also involves lower-class women, the unemployed, non-union workers and the conservative and liberal working classes. However, due to time constraints this essay will mainly focus on Trade-Unions and Social Democratic party activism as the major sources of working-class political expression.
In both Europe and America different states responded very differently to the Depression, using varied state policies to tackle the problem of mass unemployment. The traditional economic orthodox approach was a belief in laissez faire policies that involved public expenditure cuts, the free market and the conviction that unemployment was a natural part of capitalist society. The divergence from this was new Keynesian (or pre-Keynesian) influenced policies stemming from belief in government investment in economic planning and full employment strategies with new state sponsored public works. Working-class pressure from Fascist parties to Trade Unions was overwhelmingly in favour of this new more positive approach to overcoming economic problem of mass unemployment. This essay will compare Britain, the only country to steadfastly adhere to the old economic liberal traditions; with Sweden the country that most fully embraced Keynesian economic ideals with the permanent restructuring of their economy.
In Britain the Labour government 'failed to break out of the straitjacket of orthodox financial advise' (Salter and Stevenson 1990, p. 133) when faced with the mass unemployment of the Depression. The Labour cabinet agreed to the traditional response of massive cuts in public spending as unemployment had doubled in 1930 and the debt of the unemployment insurance fund stood at   110 million. The Labour party split over this issue, torn between its socialist commitment to maintaining welfare through unemployment benefit and the pressure to secure the economy. The divisions in Labour led to the creation and election of the 1931 National government encompassing Labour leaders, Conservatives and Liberals. Therefore as Whiteside (1991) argues in comparison with the other major industrial countries 'only the British electorate remained loyal to classical economic precepts' of public expenditure cuts and minimal state intervention. Arguably in Britain there was very little alternative to the traditional economic liberal policy as Keynesian ideas were not fully formed until later, with the publication of his General Theory in 1936. However, there were opposing voices with the Trade Union general council any cuts to unemployment insurance whatsoever to protect their workers interests. This 'union firmness sprang from the Keynes influenced conviction... that the entire deflationary policy was misconceived' (Heclo 1974, p. 120) thus this failed protest represents working class pressure against government economic policy.
In marked contrast, Sweden adopted Keynesian ideas and implemented a new economic policy with their new Social Democratic government. Thus it was Sweden alone that used 'the Depression to mount an all-out assault on the organising principle of bourgeois politics' (Higgins 1985, p. 105) by dismantling the prevailing economic liberal ideology. When the Depression struck, Sweden unlike Britain already had a reflationary response in the Social Democratic party 's 'Crisis Programme' calling for expanded state funded public works and an planned unemployment policy to support the Labour Market in general. In winning the 1932 election the Social Democrats were able to lead a practical political breakthrough against the traditionally dominant economic doctrine.
Therefore, the Swedish example indicates the critical importance of working-class pressure in shaping economic policy; as the representatives of the working-classes the Social Democrats and their partners the Trade Unions were triumphant. In contrast, the British working-class pressure was arguably a less critical influence on unemployment policy than the hegemonic economic liberalism supported by ruling elites and the middle classes. This notable disparity invokes two questions: firstly why was economic orthodoxy so dominant in Britain? Secondly, why did the Swedish support a new government and policy that involved a radical restructuring of the economy?.
The two main interlinked reasons why unemployment policy in Britain was shaped by economic orthodoxy far more than by working-class pressure; were the dominance of the ruling elite and the vitality of the British Liberal tradition. The relatively newly enfranchised working-classes and their organisations lacked the political clout to tackle the historic legacy of ruling elite ascendance. The 1929 Labour government was a 'hung parliament' thus in facing the economic crisis it desperately needed the support of the Conservatives, Liberals, the Bank of England and the Treasury. Therefore the Labour cabinet accepted these groups 'essentially political interpretation of the collapse of the international monetary system' (Heclo 1974, p. 119). The traditional dominance of economic liberalism benefited middle class and ruling elite interests by promoting the theory that unemployment is natural; thus these groups had a vested interested in upholding this economic orthodoxy. The dominant ideology held that Britain 's wealth and empire were built on its laissez faire and free trade economic policies therefore the 'policy for the unemployed still betrayed the political and cultural heritage of the nineteenth century' (Whiteside 1991, p. 122). Consequently, the sheer magnitude of middle class and ruling elite political support for the economic orthodoxy of the Bank of England and the Treasury; ensured working class pressure was less important factor shaping economic policy.
Contrastingly, working class pressure was critically important in the development of Swedish state policies to overcome mass unemployment as within three years of the Depressions advent 'the balance of class political power had radically and permanently shifted in favour of the Labour movement' (Higgins 1985, p. 105). The major reasons for this shift were Trade Union organisational and political developments; the creation of the Social Democrats 'Crisis Programme'; the unity of the Swedish Labour movement and its alliance with the farmers lobby.
In the late twenties Trade Union leaders began to question the ascendancy of economic liberalism in Sweden; critiquing its assumption of the 'temporary' nature of unemployment. Moreover, the unions became increasingly militant in response to the government Unemployment Commission 's anti-union activities including using unemployed workers to break strike activity. In 1928 the Central Confederation of Trade Unions demanded a 'completely new unemployment policy' (Higgins 1985, p. 109). This increasing militancy and growing tide of union feeling could not be ignored, least of all by the Social Democrats. Alongside these Trade Union developments there emerged a second generation of Social Democratic leaders personified by Ernst Wigforss who became Finance Minister after 1932. Wigforss demanded socialism become a practical party policy rejecting the orthodox Marxist doctrine of waiting for and stimulating the crisis in capitalism and then implementing socialist policies. His more pragmatic new policy was the antithesis of economic liberalism calling for economic planning, greater public spending and the maintenance of working-class purchasing power through a full employment policy. Wigforss won the party over by providing a 'new conception of what ought to be done' (Heclo 1974, p. 101) about the problem of mass unemployment. Therefore working-class pressure was crucially important in Sweden as the representatives of the working-classes, the Social Democratic party and the Trade Unions, provided a comprehensive, popular and coherent programme of reform.
Moreover the internal unification of and economic consensus in, the Swedish Labour movement ensured it was a critical factor in the development of state policies to tackle the problem of mass unemployment. Britain 's Labour movement, in contrast, was irreconcilably split over the  'symbolic importance of unemployment insurance cuts' (Heclo 1974, p.119) thus working-class pressure in Britain was weakened. Furthermore, while the minority British Left who called for a re-evaluation of the traditional deflationary economic policy were isolated; Swedish Social Democrats were able to unite with the farmers lobby to push through their policy for overcoming mass unemployment. The Social Democrats won the 1932 election but like the British Labour party in 1929 they did not have a majority in parliaments. Nonetheless, through 'detailed manoeuvring and negotiations' (Heclo 1974, p. 101) they established the Kohandel agreement that gave economic concessions to the agriculture in exchange for the farmers party vote on the crisis policy. Sweden had (and Britain lacked) a large agricultural industry with a powerful lobby thus in 1933 when the Agrarian League 's 'old conservative leadership lost control... a new leadership in favour of a "red-green" alliance with the Social Democrats emerged' (Higgins 1985, p. 144).
Therefore with the internal unification, partnership of the Agrarian League, Trade Union support and the development of the 'Crisis Programme' meant that 'the considerable mobilizing forces of the Swedish Labour movement were galvanised around a lucid and appealing alternative vision' (Higgins 1985, p. 112). Therefore working-class pressure was crucial in Sweden as it provided a new radical and coherent programme to overcome mass unemployment. Whereas, working-class pressure in Britain had a negligible effect in the face of the united dominance of the economic orthodoxy of the ruling class.
However, the differences in class power structures are not the only reasons for the divergent unemployment strategies implemented by the Swedish and British states. The contrasting nature of mass unemployment in the two different countries also explains why working-class pressure was so crucial in Sweden and less important in Britain. Unlike Germany and America, the Swedish and British had both experienced persistently high unemployment throughout the twenties therefore the Depression was not such a shock. However, Britain 's highly particular and regional experience of mass unemployment during the Slump years meant it had a very different response from other European countries. As Whiteside (1991, p.112) argues 'only Britain... experienced structural, highly regional unemployment' due to the decline in heavy industry hitting the Northern industrial areas the hardest. British society in the thirties became heavily polarised between the northern working-class areas facing debilitating unemployment levels and desperate poverty and the affluent more middle-class South. A significant number actually saw improvements as 'average real living standards for those in work rose in the thirties by between fifteen and eighteen percent' (Salter and Stevenson 1990, p. 140). Smaller families, cheaper food and later economic recovery ensured that many members of the population were unaffected by the devastation of the Depression. As the most shattering effects of the Slump mainly struck those unemployed working-class in Northern industrial areas there was a lack of support for new radical policies and an unquestioning acceptance of economic orthodoxy by the middle classes. Therefore the unemployed working-class were demoralised, neglected and disillusioned, as such, the pressure they asserted on government was minimal and ignored. The effect of the Depression on Sweden, in contrast, was permeated the whole of society thus working-class pressure for reform was supported across class lines.
Nevertheless, the unemployed working-class in Britain were not wholly inactive and demoralised as they did engage in political protests and in some cases change unemployment policy. Thus British working-class pressure was, at times, an important influence on the development of state policies to overcome mass unemployment. Heclo (1974, p.124) cites the protests against the 1934 Unemployment Act as a rare occasion where 'popular pressure directly altered the substantive content of a policy'. The Unemployment Assistance board gave cash indefinitely according to need; however in practice this meant recipients were subjected to a humiliating means-test. There was a storm of protest against the rigid and bureaucratic implementation of a new benefit scale and the hated means-test. The result was the Unemployment Assistance (Temporary Provision) Act of 1935 that provided cash relief based on need outside the old Poor Law principle of 'less eligibility'. Therefore this protest indicates that on rare occasions working-class pressure could have an important impact on state unemployment laws. Moreover, the hunger marches were also important means by which the working-class unemployed were able to shape government economic policy. The hunger marches were a campaign of mass demonstrations, protests and propaganda to highlight the plight of the unemployed. The main leader of this campaign was the National Unemployed Workers Movement (NUWM) a communist group with the objective of mobilizing and politicizing the working-classes. Their 1932 National Hunger March was an important piece of  'successful agitation... forcing the National government to halt its introduction of nationally based, unemployment benefits' (Salter and Stevenson 1990, p.138). Therefore working-class pressure was able to successful adapt government unemployment policy with rare displays of particularly powerful protest.
In conclusion, working - class pressure was crucial in Sweden as its representatives, the Social Democrats, managed to implement significant structural changes that radically altered unemployment policy. The Social Democrats restructured the Swedish economy by instigating state regulation not as a temporary measure but as permanent fixture to guarantee full employment. As Heclo (1974) argues there was a shift from the treatment of unemployment policy as an improvised social programme to an economic tool for labour market policy. Therefore the Social Democratic ascendancy in Sweden in the early thirties was arguably a triumph of working class pressure, organisations and ideals. However, this victory was only possible with cross-class support for the reforms ensuring their introduction and longevity. In contrast, the National government did not implement any significant structural reforms in Britain as this country only embraced Keynesian ideals after the Second World War. Thus the British response to the Slump was 'one of studied inactivity' (Whiteside 1991, p. 118) in comparison with other major industrial countries. The critical divisions in the Labour movement; the regional nature of unemployment that isolated the industrial working-class and the dominance of the ruling elite ensured that working-class pressure was marginal and ineffective. The protests of 1932 and 1935 indicate rare occasions where the unemployed working class were able to make important difference. Nonetheless working-class pressure in Britain was significantly less crucial than in Sweden as the British unemployed were largely isolated, demoralised and disillusioned by the devastating effects of the Great Depression.
