International Humanitarian Law (IHL), or the laws of war (jus in bello), is the legal regime which encompasses the definition and the limitation of what is permissible in the conduct of armed conflicts and the protection and responsibilities of the persons involved in the conflict. It is codified in the four 1949 Geneva Conventions, the 1977 and 2005 Additional Protocols.
The phenomenon of terrorism appeared centuries ago in the form of state terrorism (the regime of Terror established under the Convention by Robespierre during the 18 th century French Revolution; the terrorist policy of the Proletarian state) but it developed against the state during the 20 th century. Let 's consider the synthetic definition Gilbert Guillaume gives of it:
G. Guillaume, 'Terrorism and international law', ICLQ vol. 53, 2004, pp. 537-548, p. 541.
This definition is currently accepted and has been used by the international community to depict the acts of violence which occurred on 9/11/01 in New York, 12/10/02 in Bali, 11/03/04 in Madrid, 7/7/05 in London, and 11/07/06 in Bombay. Though, a legal definition has never been given in any legal international instrument.
These events enact the recent development of non-state transnational armed actors and challenge the traditional legal apprehension of warfare and armed conflicts.
A new type of war has emerged: the asymmetric war opposes a state and a group of private actors. The legal status of the actors of terrorism as an asymmetric war is the focus of this report. Do the actors of an asymmetric conflict observe the limitations on the means and methods of warfare set by the law of war? If not, are they entitled to the protection of IHL rules? Do legal principles apply to the perpetrators of unlawful acts of war? What are their rights and responsibilities?.
As IHL is done by and for the states, the question of the legitimacy, if any, of the use of force by non-state actors is highly controversial. Indeed, what are the consequences of the lack of protection and responsibility of transnational non-state groups involved in an armed conflict with a state? How might an increase of this protection change the outcome of the war?.
Since only states can be parties in the Geneva Conventions, IHL does not apply to conflicts between a state and a terrorist group.
The necessity of a legal and general definition must be based on the reduction of the concept of terrorism to necessary and sufficient conditions and variables. But then, one might wonder what the use and the implications of such a definition are when it clearly appears that a consensus is internationally reached upon the qualification of the events from New York to Bombay as terrorist acts.
The first section of this report will consider the controversial and ambiguous aspects of the phenomenon of terrorism. The second section will focus on the problems raised by the Guantanamo Bay detention centre. The last section will explore the possibilities and difficulties of the codification of the concept of terrorism and will raise the crucial critical question of its potential consequence on the relation between IHL and Human Rights law.
Despite the numerous legal instruments prohibiting acts of terrorism (The Hague Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft, 1970; New York Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes Against Internationally Protected Persons, 1973; International Convention Against the Taking of Hostages, New York, 1979; Rome Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Maritime Navigation, 1988), the term 'terrorism' has never been used or defined in any of them. Indeed, it was difficult to find a unanimously accepted definition of terrorism because of the opposition of the members of the Group of 77 which did not want to confuse terrorism and national liberation movements in a period of decolonization. This debate highlights the ambiguity and ambivalence of the notion of terrorism whose definition is necessarily biased. It is striking that neither the European Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism of 1977, nor the International Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings of 1997 mentioned any definition of terrorism. The International Convention for the suppression of the Financing of Terrorism of 1999 (the most achieved text on the issue) mentions the term 'terrorism' ten times without defining it. In the Resolution 1368 of 12 September 2001, the Security Council did not specify what the term 'terrorism' meant.
Guillaume, G., Op. Cit. p. 540.
It seems that this absence of definition is rather a way for states to use and legitimate ways to struggle against terrorism than a deficiency. Indeed, terrorism is precisely an asymmetric threat where the target is easily identifiable (the state, its population and civil infrastructures) whereas the perpetrators and their weapons can take every possible form. A definition is a way to name something but also a way to enclose, delimitate a phenomenon to its definition and exclude exterior aspects. If a definition of terrorism had been accepted unanimously, the danger would be that, renewing itself constantly, it would escape from its definition and leave the states without any legal means of riposte. There is no limit to the scope of action against terrorism as long as terrorism is not defined. It is in fact the international community which tries to cope with the renewal and constant reinvention of terrorism.
To which legal category does the terrorist correspond? The category of 'terrorists' can be defined negatively according to two sets of conditions that they do not meet. It is important to note that each category applied to the terrorist act falls automatically into the imprecision.
It is a common opinion that terrorists aim at attacking civilians and civil targets. Al Qaeda justifies it by holding the population of a state responsible for the acts of its government. This is a first breach in one of the cardinal principles of IHL: the distinction of civilians and combatants and the protection of the first. Indeed, the First Additional Protocol of the Geneva Convention of 12 August 1949, referring to the protection of victims of international armed conflicts, 08 June 1977, in its article 51-2, prohibits the acts of terrorism against civilians:
If the function of this categorization is to accuse terrorists of war crimes, then the unlawful attack of military persons and objects should be qualified of act of terrorism. Indeed, both civilians and combatants are protected by IHL. This criterion seems then not to help at circumscribing the concept of terrorism.
Second, the terrorist does not fit into the definition of a combatant (member of armed forces inside an armed conflict). Armed forces are defined by Article 43 of the Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Convention IV as.
Criteria defining armed conflicts depend on the intensity, the number of active participants, the number of victims, the duration and the prolonged character of the violence, the organization and the discipline of the parties, the capability to respect IHL, the collective, open and coordinated character of the hostilities, and the direct involvement of governmental armed forces. Clearly, terrorist groups who committed the attacks of New York, Madrid, London and Bali were not armed forces part of an armed conflict.
M. Sassoli, The status of persons held in Guantanamo under IHL, JICJ 2, 2004, 96-106, p. 100.
IHL is there in a dead-end. The qualification of armed conflict is a matter of threshold and intensity. If an armed attack does not meet all the criteria, then it is not an armed conflict and the persons who take part in it are not concerned by IHL. How then to qualify the attacks of 9/11 which inflicted massive destructions, the death of almost 3000 people, and which required sustained and intense funding and logistics. I believe that IHL should apply to terrorists, in a very specific way which calls for special provisions codified in a specified treaty.
What answers the category of unprivileged combatants brings. This category defines the civilians who take part in a conflict. They may be attacked during the hostilities, because they unlawfully participated in the conflict. They can be punished for unlawful participation and accused of war crimes. Their rights can be denied for security reasons. This is actually the status of the terrorists affiliated to Al Qaeda captured in Afghanistan.
The difficulties encountered by the international community to reach a consensus about the definition of terrorism are due to the fact that 'one 's terrorist is another 's freedom fighter'. We cannot treat people who fight for freedom against an aggressor (the French Resistants under the Nazi occupation of France during WWII) in the same way as we should treat people who bombed two buildings with the intention of killing people and spreading terror in a society. The difference is a matter of legitimacy. The actions of Al Qaeda may appear legitimate for a part of the Muslim community. The attacks of the Twin Towers as a symbol of capitalism and consumption might have been seen as legitimate. The subjective element of a just cause should not enter the definition of terrorism at all. Indeed, does a good cause justify the use of ultimate means of violence? The motive of action of terrorists is irrelevant to qualify it as a terrorist act. We should treat terrorism as we treat torture, like a taboo, something nobody is entitled to do whatever the purpose.
The Indefinable Concept of Terrorism, G. P. Fletcher, JICJ, OUP, 2006, pp. 1-18, p. 13.
Since only states can be parties to the Geneva Conventions, IHL does not apply to conflicts between a state and a terrorist group. Thus, the conflict between a state and a terrorist group is not considered as an international conflict. But the war against Afghanistan was an international conflict since the Taliban represented the state de facto. Thus, the war on terrorism against Al Qaeda is covered by the law of international armed conflict only when it is effectively controlled by the Taliban, it means only in Afghanistan. Even if a conflict does not qualify as an international armed conflict it may be non-international armed conflicts, covered by Article 3, of the four Geneva Conventions, prohibiting 'the passing of sentences and the carrying out of executions without previous judgment pronounced by a regularly constituted court, affording all the judicial guarantees'. But it has to be an armed conflict as well. 'Terrorist actions by private groups have not customarily been viewed as creating armed conflicts'.
M. Sassoli, Op. Cit. p. 101.
The problem of this detention camp is that the detainees belong to different legal categories (the Taliban are prisoners of war, Al Qaeda members are unprivileged combatants) but are all treated as 'unlawful combatants', a category invented by the US administration. The category of 'unlawful combatants' answers the question of who qualifies to the status of prisoner of war. This category does not exist. The US administration admitted having invented this category because the terrorists did not fit in any of the categories of IHL (neither civilians nor combatants). But it seems that it is the US administration which does not want them to fit in any category. Indeed, the Geneva Conventions are clear on the issue of incertitude. When doubts exist about a person 's status, she should be qualified as prisoner of war and benefit all the protections due, until more clarifications are made. The US is openly breaching the basic rules of IHL and International Human Rights Law. It is a sign that terrorism represents a black hole in IHL since these breaches cannot be repaired.
Another approach can be considered. Fletcher, in 'The indefinable concept of terrorism', argues that terrorism is a combination of  'super-crime' and warfare. These two categories fall under different legal regimes. A general definition of terrorism cannot be drawn from its variables because each specific case does not bear them all in the same way. In an International Criminal Law (ICL) perspective, the function of defining terrorism is to legitimate a new form of military violence by the state: 'the targeted assassination' which can be defined as extra-judicial killings. Indeed, a crime gives the obligation to a government to arrest the suspects and bring them to trial without using deadly forces. In contrast, in situation of armed conflict, ruled by the laws of war, the government is entitled to use its military force against the one of the enemy. The difficulty is to classify a serious act of violence as crime or as act of war. The terrorist people are neither criminals nor combatants. Guantanamo relies on a model of warfare without having recognized the status of prisoners of war to its detainees. The creation of a new regime of law covering terrorists might have negative consequences for civil and political rights by increasing the prerogatives of the state engaged in the 'War on terror'. A law about terrorism might for instance permit the state to deny basic defence rights to suspects of terrorist acts, in the name of national security.
Ibid.
Ibid. p. 4.
The crucial question is whether IHL should comply with the exigencies of International Human Rights Law in an exceptional context of conflict toward individuals who represent a threat for the security of the country; or whether we should regard these two regimes as distinct, and consider that International Human Rights Law applies when IHL does not.
The challenge of IHL is to respect Human Rights and, at the same time, deal with the rules of war. The problem with the category of terrorists is that it belongs to the one of 'unlawful combatant' taking part in an 'unlawful war'. The principles of IHL recognize that even if a war is unjust, unlawful, the rules of IHL and Human Rights still apply, especially to the prisoners in the way they are treated by the party which captured them. Indeed, it is not because a combatant took part in an unlawful act of war such as a terrorist attack, that his rights can be scoffed at.
Maybe the whole conception we have of IHL has to change to adapt to the new reality of asymmetric war. Would IHL remain IHL, the law of international armed conflicts, if it tries to encompass non -international and non- armed conflicts with no armed forces (the negative definition of terrorism that we can draw from the components of IHL)? It seems that IHL is not relevant to qualify the asymmetric type of conflicts of our times. Indeed, the 'war on terror' is characterized by a structural asymmetry. This asymmetry does not only concern the status of state and non-state actors, but also the transnational and global use of the new technologies of information (the Internet, the financial transfers), of transportation (the international movements of people can be a threat), of weaponry (biological and bacteriological weapons against which there are few means of prevention, the nature of a globalized world where it is more than easy for people to hide. We live in a post-modern world in which law cannot keep pace with technology and politics.
Terrorism is a concept at the centre of our political life. It is a phenomenon which shapes and informs the global politics of security, cooperation and relations between cultures. It is maybe not advisable that the complex reality of such a phenomenon should be reduced to a single word definition. It might be an error in the process of fighting, preventing and understanding such acts of violence, to wish to apply necessary and sufficient conditions and variables to this concept, and to delimitate it in an abstract category. In the same way, the most serious vigilance must be attached to the acts of the states engaged in the 'War on Terror'. The rule of law cannot be transgressed in the name of the necessity to fight a terrorist threat. The perpetrators of the most horrendous crimes still have human rights. This is the only condition that permits us to judge over them and that keeps the realm of democracy.
The attempts to create a new legal category for terrorism and terrorists rather revealed the complexity of the notion than gave a definite answer to the question. The ambiguity and subjectivity of the concept of terrorism make it impossible to find one example without its counter-example. Indeed all the criteria which qualify an act of terrorism do not apply all at the same time to each act of terrorism. This kind of concept does not fit in a legal perspective. I believe, with Fletcher, that a political intuition, respectful of the rule of law as well as International Human Rights Law, is more relevant than a legal definition. Moreover, situations like the detention of people in Guantanamo Bay are not likely to deter any potential terrorist from expressing his or her resentment through spectacular acts of violence. Politicians must be aware of the multi-faceted phenomenon of terrorism and develop policies aiming at reducing its causes and at prosecuting the perpetrators of acts of violence.
Fletcher, Op. Cit., p. 18.
A reflection must be lead about the application of legal and abstract formulations in reality.
