In De Beer v Kannar & Co (a firm) , Patten J stated that there is no application of contributory negligence for breach of trust or for breach of fiduciary duty. This contention is supported by the judgment of Blackburne J in Nationwide Building Society v Balmer Radmore (a firm) and others , where his Lordship held that there is no application of contributory negligence in breach of fiduciary duty. The effect of this is to render the trustee entirely culpable even in a case where the gross negligence of a beneficiary had contributed significantly to her own loss. Without a mechanism to effect a just allocation of responsibility, this seems to assert considerable hardship on the part of trustees.
Hans David De Beer v Kannar & Co (A Firm) and another [2002] EWHC 688 (Ch).
Ibid, at [92]. [1999] Lloyd 's Rep PN 241 (ChD).
However, New Zealand and Canadian authorities seem to point to the contrary. A plea of contributory negligence has been allowed in the context of a trustee 's breach of fiduciary duty. Moreover, it has been pointed out that while Blackburne J rejected apportionment in cases of conscious breach of fiduciary duty, his Lordship left open the door to finding contributory fault as a plea to reduce liability for mere careless breach of trust. Hence there is no binding English authority on the application of contributory negligence to trustee liability for careless breach of trust. As a result, the issue is to be determined as a question of principle and deserves closer scrutiny.
Day v Mead [1987] NZLR 443.
Canson Enterprises Ltd v Boughton & Co [1991] 3 SCR 534, (1991) 85 DLR 4th 129 (SCC).
G Watt, 'Contributory Fault and Breach of Trust', (Winter 2005) OUCLJ 5(2), 205-224, at 207-208.
G Watt, 'Contributory Fault and Breach of Trust', (Winter 2005) OUCLJ 5(2), 205-224, at 207-208.
In this paper we examine whether there is room for the introduction of contributory negligence on the part of claimants into the realm of liability of trustees for breach of their duty of care. The starting point of our analysis is the issue regarding fusion of common law and equity. We distinguish breach of fiduciary duty from breach of duty of care and make certain assumptions before proceeding to identify the relevant distinctions between tort principles and trusts law. We then focus our attention to the fault principle by comparing tortuous negligence to trustees' breach of their duty of care. After taking a closer look at the common law damages and equitable compensation, we observe that the compensatory goals of the two remedies are essentially the same. Based on this remedial congruence, we argue that both should attract the same sort of analysis in determining limitations on the remedies.
Since we are concerned with introducing a tort concept into trusts law, caution is taken with regard to the issue of fusion of common law and equity. There have been contrasting attitudes towards fusion in the debate concerning contributory fault. While some opine that fusion is of crucial importance in introducing contributory fault into trusts, others have their reservations. However, the debate regarding the fusion of law and equity concerns a wide range of issues involving the entirety of both disciplines. This is clearly out of the scope of a paper merely concerning the issue of contributory fault. Also, it must be pointed out that common law and equity are still held to be separate to this day. Fusion will only affect contributory fault if it becomes a reality, that is the entirety of common law and equity has been amalgamated into one such that contributory negligence directly applies in the context of trusts. However, given the institutional difference between legal and equitable title in modern trusts, it is submitted that fusion would have little relevance in our analysis.
See A Burrows, 'We do this at Common Law but that in Equity' (2002) 22 OJLS 1.
See J Martin, 'Fusion, Fallacy and Confusion: A Comparative Study' (1994) The Conveyancer and Property Lawyer 13.
See G Watt, 'Contributory Fault and Breach of Trust', (Winter 2005) OUCLJ 5(2), 205-224, at 210-211; see also Canson Enterprises Ltd v Boughton & Co [1991] 3 SCR 534 at 590, (1991) 85 DLR 4th 129, at 165 (SCC).
P Cane, The Anatomy of Tort Law (Hart Publishing, Oxford 1997), at 186-187.
G Watt, 'Contributory Fault and Breach of Trust', (Winter 2005) OUCLJ 5(2), 205-224, at 210.
It would be appropriate to distinguish breach of fiduciary duty from breach of duty of care at this point. This has been described as a "dimly lit area" of law. As we will see shortly, the distinguishing breach of fiduciary duty from breach of duty of care is quite similar to distinguishing breach of fiduciary duty from tortuous negligence. This observation will be carried on to the next phase of analysis.
G Watt, 'Contributory Fault and Breach of Trust', (Winter 2005) OUCLJ 5(2), 205-224, at 208.
In Bristol and West Building Society v Mothew, Millett LJ (as he was then) stated that 'not every breach of duty by a fiduciary is a breach of fiduciary duty'. A trustee 's fiduciary duty and a trustee 's duty of care are theoretically distinct, i.e. a trustee can be in breach of one without another. The former is primarily concerned with a trustee 's loyalty to the beneficiary, whereas the latter is concerned with trustee 's prudence in administering affairs concerned with the trust. The fiduciary 's obligation is designed to prevent the exploitation of conflicts of interest by the trustees, even if innocent, whereas a trustee 's duty of care is more attributable to preventing carelessness on the part of trustees. [1998] 1 Ch 1 (CA). [1998] 1 Ch 1 (CA) at 16.
G Watt, 'Contributory Fault and Breach of Trust', (Winter 2005) OUCLJ 5(2), 205-224, at 208; see also G Watt, Trusts and Equity (OUP, Oxford 2003) at 369.
Or reasonableness, according to section 1 of the Trustee Act 2000.
Bristol and West Building Society v Mothew [1998] 1 Ch 1 (CA), at 18-19.
P Cane, The Anatomy of Tort Law (Hart Publishing, Oxford 1997), at 189-190.
While a breach of a trustee 's duty of care is arguably more concerned with justice between parties, the fiduciary principle is not only concerned with justice between parties, but also to maintain exemplary standards of trust in the public interest. Another distinguishing feature is that fiduciary liability may be concerned with either unauthorized gains or harm done to the trust, whereas breach of trustee 's duty of care is primarily concerned with losses caused. A fiduciary is obliged to disgorge any gains by improperly exploiting her position to the person for whose benefit the fiduciary ought to have acted, whereas no such obligation is known to a trustee in breach of her duty of care. It is also interesting to note that fiduciary duties are different from 'any obligation imposed by tort law', since tort law generally 'does not require people to act for the benefit of others and to ignore their own interests, but to avoid causing "disbenefit" to others'.
Regal (Hastings) Ltd v Gulliver [1967] 2 AC 134n (HL) at 157B.
Bristol and West Building Society v Mothew [1998] 1 Ch 1 (CA), at 18-19; see also M Conaglen, 'The Nature and Function of Fiduciary Loyalty' (2005) 121 LQR 452, at 477-478.
P Cane, The Anatomy of Tort Law (Hart Publishing, Oxford 1997), at 189-190.
As mentioned on the outset, Commonwealth authorities have diverged on the point concerning apportionment of fiduciary liability on the ground of contributory fault. In New Zealand, Sir Cooke P in Day v Mead advocated a role for contributory negligence in the context of fiduciary breach. This was approved by the majority of the Supreme Court of Canada in Canson Enterprise Limited v Boughton & Co. However, Blackburne J in Nationwide Building Society v Balmer Radmore (a firm) and others declined its application to breach of a fiduciary duty. Although Sir Cooke P 's approach in Day received unanimous approval in the Full Court of the Supreme Court of South Australia, the High Court of Australia in Pilmer v Duke Group Ltd (in liq) dramatically rejected the New Zealand and Canadian approach and found  'severe conceptual difficulties in the path' of introducing contributory negligence into fiduciary duty. In De Beer v Kanaar & Co (a firm) , the English Chancery Court reiterated its view that the defence of contributory negligence has no application to liability for breach of fiduciary duty. Hence it is not surprising that whether a fiduciary should be allowed the defence of contributory negligence has been academically questioned. [1987] NZLR 443.
Canson Enterprises Ltd v Boughton & Co [1991] 3 SCR 534, (1991) 85 DLR 4th 129 (SCC). [1999] Lloyd 's Rep PN 241 (ChD).
Duke Group Ltd (in liq) v Pilmer (No 2) (1999) 31 ACSR 213. (2001) 207 CLR 165.
Pilmer (2001) 207 CLR 165, at 201.
Hans David De Beer v Kannar & Co (A Firm) and another [2002] EWHC 688.
Hans David De Beer v Kannar & Co (A Firm) and another [2002] EWHC 688, at [92].
See, for example, CEF Rickett 'Where Are We Going With Equitable Compensation?' in AJ Oakley (ed), Trends in Contemporary Trust Law (Clarendon Press Oxford 1996) at 177, as cited in R Mulheron 'Contributory negligence in equity: Should fiduciaries accept all the blame?', (2003) 19(3) Professional Negligence 422-436.
Due to the close conceptual proximity of liability for a trustee 's breach of fiduciary duty and liability of trustees for breach of their duty of care, it is important to dispel arguments that stem from the fiduciary principle before proceeding. Case law rejecting contributory negligence in breach of fiduciary duty has been based primarily on the distinctive features of a trustee 's fiduciary duty. Considerable argument is related to the exemplary function of the fiduciary principle. This is the strong policy-based presumption that a trustee should bear the risk of all losses flowing from breach of fiduciary duty. For this reason, it has been suggested that finding contributory negligence on the part of the beneficiary is notionally inconsistent with the existence of a fiduciary relationship. While there is considerable force in this argument, the argument dissipates when one considers the context of a trustee in breach of her duty of care. A trustee 's duty of care is simply not concerned with maintaining any exemplary standards in the public interest. It may be noted that the same may be said for tortuous negligence as well, where there is arguably no similar exemplary function. Hence this argument does not directly apply in the context of trustees' duty of care.
G Watt, 'Contributory Fault and Breach of Trust', (Winter 2005) OUCLJ 5(2), 205-224, at 209.
For a survey on both sides of the argument, see R Mulheron 'Contributory negligence in equity: Should fiduciaries accept all the blame?', (2003) 19(3) Professional Negligence 422-436, at 434-435.
G Watt, 'Contributory Fault and Breach of Trust', (Winter 2005) OUCLJ 5(2), 205-224, at 211-212.
See P Cane, The Anatomy of Tort Law (Hart Publishing, Oxford 1997), at 58-60.
The second argument against the introduction of contributory negligence into liability for breach of fiduciary duty is related to the intention element. One must distinguish conscious disloyalty from mere careless breach. The argument for the rejection of contributory negligence in fiduciary duty is that contributory negligence has never been a defence to intentional torts and an intentional element must be present to establish a breach of fiduciary duty. Given the exemplary function of fiduciary duties, Blackburne J in Nationwide Building Society v Balmer Radmore (a firm) and others held that there was no good reason why equity should adopt a less rigorous approach. However, the argument must be qualified with the fact that contributory negligence is available to trespass to persons in tort. Moreover, the same could not be said for a trustee 's breach of her duty of care. Arguably, a trustee 's carelessness could not be said to be a deliberate act in the conscious sense referred to by Millett LJ (as he was then) in Bristol and West Building Society v Mothew , such that this reason also loses force in the context of trustees' duty of care. Again, the same may be said for tortuous negligence. Thus, trustees' breach of their duty of care is in the same position as tortuous negligence in this sense.
G Watt, 'Contributory Fault and Breach of Trust', (Winter 2005) OUCLJ 5(2), 205-224, at 209. [1999] Lloyd 's Rep PN 241 (ChD).
Nationwide Building Society v Balmer Radmore (a firm) and others [1999] Lloyd 's Rep PN 241 (ChD).
See R Mulheron 'Contributory negligence in equity: Should fiduciaries accept all the blame?', (2003) 19(3) Professional Negligence 422-436, at 425.
See G Watt, 'Contributory Fault and Breach of Trust', (Winter 2005) OUCLJ 5(2), 205-224, at 209. [1998] 1 Ch 1 (CA).
It is appropriate to note that this area of law is still in flux and concepts are still being contested. For example, it has been pointed out that the line between conduct amounting to mere negligence and that amounting to breach of fiduciary duty is 'a fine one'. Before proceeding to the fault principle, it is important to lay down solid conclusions in this section. These conclusions are to be assumed for the rest of this paper. We assume that fiduciary duty and a trustee 's duty of care are distinct, non-overlapping concepts. When we consider a trustee 's breach of her duty of care, we assume that her fiduciary duties, together with the exemplary functions of a trustee 's fiduciary duties do not come into play. In other words, for the rest of this essay, we assume that taking account of the beneficiary 's fault to reduce trustee liability for her breach of duty of care would not infringe the fiduciary principle to such an extent that it would damage the public perception of trust.
T Dugdale, 'Contributory Negligence: Continuing Controversy' (1999) 15(3) Professional Negligence 164, at 169.
This is adopted from Watt 's article concerning contributory fault in bare trusts, see G Watt, 'Contributory Fault and Breach of Trust', (Winter 2005) OUCLJ 5(2), 205-224, at 213.
We now consider tort negligence and the trustee 's breach of their duty of care (hereinafter 'our breach in question'). It would be appropriate to say a few words on the relationship of tort law and trusts law before moving on. Tort law is can be viewed as a set of protective rules which establish obligations designed to protect interests created by constitutive rules of the law of trusts, whereas trusts law contains both constitutive and protective rules. According to the same logic, the realm of liability of trustees for breach of their duty of care should be within the area of the protective rules of trusts. In this sense, liability for interference of with common law property rights is comparable with the trustee 's liability for breach of their duty of care. However, that is not to say that tort law protects equitable property rights, rather, it is to treat our breach in question as an "equitable wrong". Hence, the basic 'building blocks' of liability for interference of common law property rights should be comparable to those of liability for interference with equitable property rights.
Constitutive rules may be explained as rules which establish (proprietary) rights and interests, whereas protective rules are rules which protect those rights, see P Cane, The Anatomy of Tort Law (Hart Publishing, Oxford 1997), at 11.
P Cane, The Anatomy of Tort Law (Hart Publishing, Oxford 1997), at 75-76.
P Cane, The Anatomy of Tort Law (Hart Publishing, Oxford 1997), at 75-76.
In theory, the tortuous duty of care and the trustee 's duty of care are distinct. A trustee 's duty of care means 'a duty to take care to avoid causing injury or loss', but operates to the exclusion of 'any common law duty of care which might otherwise have applied'. However, there are emerging trends that the distinction is being blurred in practice. In fact, the duty of care owed by a trustee has been suggested to be recognized as the same type of duty as the duty of care owed by other professionals such as bailees, directors and agents. In determining whether a person 's conduct was reasonable in tortuous negligence, the degree of their personal or experience in relation to the risk activity is irrelevant, unless the defendant actively lead the claimant to think that she was more than typically skilled or experienced. Arguably, the same could be said for trustees, such that a certain standard of care and skill is reasonable 'in the circumstances'.
Henderson v Merrett Syndicates Ltd [1995] 2 AC 145 (HL).
Explanatory notes of the Trustee Act 2000, note 11.
See for example, Lord Brown-Wilkinson in Henderson v Merrett Syndicates Ltd [1995] 2 AC 145 (HL), at 205.
Henderson v Merrett Syndicates Ltd [1995] 2 AC 145 (HL), at 205.
P Cane, The Anatomy of Tort Law (Hart Publishing, Oxford 1997), at 42.
See G Watt, Trusts and Equity (OUP, Oxford 2003) at 373.
However, despite this resemblance, whether the fault principle of tortuous negligence is applicable in the realm of liability of trustees for breach of their duty of care has been contentious. According to Lord Brown-Wilkinson in Target Holdings v Redferns , trustee liability is fault-based and not strict. On the other hand, Sir Peter Millett has argued extra-judicially that where the breach of trust involves an unauthorized act, as opposed to mere faulty execution of an authorized act, liability should be strict liability on a common account rather than fault based liability to compensate. If this aspect of trustee liability is fault based, then the trustee should only be liable to the extent of losses property attributable to their fault. 'Primary fault and contributory fault are opposing sides of the fault principle coin; the former is not legitimate unless the latter is acknowledged'. Hence, following the principle in Target Holdings v Redferns , there should at least be room for the introduction of contributory negligence in the realm of liability for our breach in question. Due to these similarities between the tortuous duty of care and the trustee 's duty of care, it is suggested that the same sort of analysis should be adopted in determining appropriate remedies. [1996] 1 AC 421 (HL).
Target Holdings v Redferns [1996] 1 AC 421 (HL), per Lord Browne-Wilkinson, at 432.
G Watt, 'Contributory Fault and Breach of Trust', (Winter 2005) OUCLJ 5(2), 205-224, at 216. [1996] 1 AC 421 (HL).
See S Worthington, Equity (2nd ed, Clarendon Law Series 2006).
However, if trustee liability is strict, then room for introduction of contributory negligence may be a bit tight. Although contributory negligence may be available in certain tortuous strict liability by virtue of legislation, this is usually confined to the realm of outcome-based strict liability. In relation to conduct-based strict liability, the primary role of which is to protect property rights, tort law has consistently followed the principle that people should not be expected to take care of their own property. Likewise, the fact that the beneficiary was careless in handling affairs related to her trust property may render her an unworthy owner, but it should not make her beneficiary interests any less hers. An uncompromising attitude to the protection of property may be thought essential to the smooth running of a market economy. This is especially relevant in the context of bare trusts, since many trustees of bare trusts are nowadays in essence commercial agents.
For example, Consumer Protection Act 1987, ss.6(4),(5), where there is a defence for contributory negligence even for strict liability for a defective product.
See P Cane, The Anatomy of Tort Law (Hart Publishing, Oxford 1997), at 59-60.
P Cane, The Anatomy of Tort Law (Hart Publishing, Oxford 1997), at 60.
This argument is adopted from P Cane, The Anatomy of Tort Law (Hart Publishing, Oxford 1997), at 60.
Bristol and West Building Society v Mothew [1998] 1 Ch 1 (CA), at 22.
Although there are considerable similarities may be drawn between tortuous negligence and liability of trustees for breach of their duty of care, it remains to be seen whether the latter is governed by the same fault principle that governs the former. However, in the ensuing discussion about their respective remedies, we will make important distinctions that are decisive on this point. For the time being, we assume that the reasoning in Target Holdings is correct.
In this section, we look at common law damages and equitable compensation. It is generally accepted that common law damages in tortuous negligence is to compensate a victim for actionable losses that a tortfeasor has caused her to suffer. Equitable compensation, however, is a rather tortured concept. Its use has been described as 'unclear' with 'overlapping nomenclature' with 'labels used interchangeably to describe quite different remedies commonly governed by the courts, and there are diverging opinions regarding the distinction between equitable compensation and equitable accounting for loss.
See for example, NJ McBride & R Bagshaw, Tort Law (Pearson Ed, 2005), at 23.
For an excellent disambiguation of nomenclature regarding various money awards against defaulting trustees, see JJ Edelman & S Elliott, 'Money remedies against trustees', 2004 TLI 18(3), 116-131.
For an outline of these arguments, see A Burrow & E Peel (eds), Commercial Remedies: Current Issues and Problems (OUP, Oxford 2003), at 46.
For the purpose of clarity without venturing off-topic into the debate concerning equitable compensation, we call on the aid of 'a powerful legal microscope' and employ alternate nomenclature that has been provided elsewhere. In general, money awards against defaulting trustees can be divided into five different types, each given on a different basis, namely: substitutive compensation, compensatory damages (or reparative compensation), disgorgement damages, restitutionary damages and punitive damages. Of these five types, only the first two are of interest to us. Substitutive compensation may refer to the money substitute for value required to perfect a failed duty a trustee promised to deliver; whereas reparative compensation may refer to the money required to make good losses occasioned by a trustee 's breach of trust, including a trustee 's imprudent investment. 'Equitable compensation' is a term that has been said to be used variably to encompass both substitutive and reparative compensation. This has been suggested to be the source of the confusion in terminology. In contrast, the notion covered by the latter term would better describe the type of remedy to be pursued in a case of a breach of trustee 's duty of care. Hence, to remove any ambiguity and confusion in terminology for the rest of this essay, 'equitable compensation' for our purposes of considering liability of trustees for breach of their duty of care will be referring to reparative compensation rather than substitutive compensation.
The confusion amidst the debate on the 'restitution theory' of equitable compensation and 'damages theory' counterpart is noted, see JJ Edelman & S Elliott, 'Money remedies against trustees', 2004 TLI 18(3), 116-131.
Bartlett v Barclays Bank Trust Co Ltd (Nos 1 and 2) [1980] Ch 515 (Ch), at 545.
The discussion that follows regarding the five types of money awards against defaulting trustees are taken from JJ Edelman & S Elliott, 'Money remedies against trustees', 2004 TLI 18(3), 116-131.
JJ Edelman & S Elliott, 'Money remedies against trustees', 2004 TLI 18(3), 116-131.
Bearing this new meaning of equitable compensation in mind, the similarities between common law damages and equitable compensation immediately resonate. Both are clearly calculated to make good a loss sustained by the claimant by reason of the defendant 's wrongful act. Their goals of compensation are essentially the same. Even Blackburne J in Nationwide Building Society v Balmer Radmore (a firm) and others who advocated the view that there was no application of contributory negligence in breach of fiduciary duty, nevertheless took note that there is 'potential coincidence' between principles of common law damages and equitable compensation. Moreover, there is considerable agreement that the differences between common law damages and equitable compensation are historical. Furthermore, it has also been suggested that 'the strict approach towards equitable compensation and the differentiation that once existed between it and compensation in tort, has gradually been eroded'. This remedial congruence would add considerable weight to the reasoning in Target Holdings. Hence it is understandable that it has been suggested that in bare trusts, the trustee 's duty is not to compensate the beneficiary indirectly by accounting to the trust, but to compensate the beneficiary directly, such that there is no fundamental difference between the trustee 's duty to compensate for losses caused by breach of the trustee 's duty of care and common law liability to compensate an injured party for negligently caused harm'. Likewise, if we accept our new view on 'equitable compensation', then according to the same logic, there should be no fundamental difference between this type of equitable compensation and common law liability to compensate an injured party for negligently caused harm.
See La Forest J 's judgment in Canson Enterprises Ltd v Boughton & Co [1991] 3 SCR 534, (1991) 85 DLR 4th 129 (SCC). [1999] Lloyd 's Rep PN 241 (ChD).
Nationwide Building Society v Balmer Radmore (a firm) and others [1999] Lloyd 's Rep PN 241 (ChD), per Blackburne J, at 282; see also R Mulheron 'Contributory negligence in equity: Should fiduciaries accept all the blame?', (2003) 19(3) Professional Negligence 422-436, at 429.
See for example, G Watt, 'Contributory Fault and Breach of Trust', (Winter 2005) OUCLJ 5(2), 205-224, at 207; JJ Edelman & S Elliott, 'Money remedies against trustees', 2004 TLI 18(3), 116-131; S Worthington, Equity (2nd ed, Clarendon Law Series 2006).
R Mulheron 'Contributory negligence in equity: Should fiduciaries accept all the blame?', (2003) 19(3) Professional Negligence 422-436, at 430.
G Watt, 'Contributory Fault and Breach of Trust', (Winter 2005) OUCLJ 5(2), 205-224, at 207.
There are considerable objections concerning contributory negligence and contributory fault in relation to the victim and the beneficiary 's conduct must be drawn. In tort, contributory negligence consists of failure to take care for one 's own interests. Contributory negligence will only succeed if the victim 's conduct negligently contributed to the losses for which damages are to be awarded. The same should be said for contributory fault for our breach in question, that is the beneficiary 's careless conduct directly, and not coincidentally, contributed to her losses. However, contributory negligence rests on the assumption that the victim 's loss was caused by failure to take steps to protect her own interests, or that she relied unreasonably on a statement made by the tortfeasor.
P Cane, The Anatomy of Tort Law (Hart Publishing, Oxford 1997), at 58.
P Cane, The Anatomy of Tort Law (Hart Publishing, Oxford 1997), at 178.
P Cane, The Anatomy of Tort Law (Hart Publishing, Oxford 1997), at 179.
The policy underlying the defence of contributory negligence is that 'people should take reasonable care for themselves as well as for others'. In other words, a function of contributory negligence is to make people take care of themselves, which include mitigating their losses flowing from the tortuous conduct of others. The victim 's responsibility for losses resulting from her reactions to the tort, whether acts or omissions is governed by the doctrine of mitigation and the doctrine of intervening causation, such that the victim is expected to take reasonable care for themselves even if this requires positive steps. Conversely, if the beneficiary is entitled to  'single-minded loyalty' and a duty of care from the trustee, it is difficult to see when a beneficiary is obliged to take steps to protect her own interests or occasions where she is not entitled to rely on a statement made by the trustee. While it is unclear whether English courts would accept a duty to mitigate loss on the part of a claimant beneficiary, there are Canadian authorities that have recognized a duty on the part of a claimant beneficiary to mitigate loss caused by a fiduciary breach. Hence, the strength of these objections remain to be seen.
See P Cane, The Anatomy of Tort Law (Hart Publishing, Oxford 1997), at 60.
P Cane, The Anatomy of Tort Law (Hart Publishing, Oxford 1997), at 179.
Burke v Cory (1959) 19 DLR (2d) 252; see also R Mulheron 'Contributory negligence in equity: Should fiduciaries accept all the blame?', (2003) 19(3) Professional Negligence 422-436, at 429.
However, continuing the logic in the previous section of this paper, if the remedies for tortuous negligence and for our breach in question are essentially similar in substance, then the same sort of analysis in determining appropriate limitations on the two remedies should be applied. This has already been echoed in an argument elsewhere that remoteness criteria for unintentional breach of trustee 's duty of care should be the same as those applied in the tort of negligence. Lord Brown-Wilkinson in Target Holdings v Redferns stated that '[t]he detailed rules of equity as to causation and the quantification of loss differ, at least ostensibly, from those applicable at common law. But the principles underlying both systems are the same'. Although the contributory negligence statute clearly does not apply in the context of trusts, given the number of similar qualities between the two as highlighted in the analysis above, the defence of contributory negligence from tort should be similarly applied as contributory fault in the realm of liability of trustees for breach of their duty of care. In particular, a function of contributory negligence in tort law is to act as a mechanism to effect a just allocation of responsibility. It is submitted that this function is directly comparable to that it might serve in the law of trusts. There is already support for apportionment in cases of merely careless breach in the area of bare trusts. It is submitted that the reason for confining the argument for introducing apportionment into breach of trustee 's duty of care to bare trusts rather than trusts in general was primarily related to avoiding potential arguments that arise from the confusion in equitable compensation. However, it is also submitted that our new meaning of equitable compensation dispels these concerns, such that there is room for the introduction of contributory negligence into liability for breach of trustee 's duty of care to trusts in general.
See S Elliott, 'Remoteness Criteria in Equity' (2002) 65 MLR 588. [1996] 1 AC 421 (HL).
Target Holdings v Redferns [1996] 1 AC 421 (HL), per Lord Browne-Wilkinson, at 432.
Law Reform (Contributory Negligence) Act 1945. . See G Watt, 'Contributory Fault and Breach of Trust', (Winter 2005) OUCLJ 5(2), 205-224.
Tort-like considerations of contributory negligence should be introduced to trustee liability for breach of their duty of care. A plausible mechanism would be to introduce a rebuttable presumption against apportionment of liability for the careless trustee. However, it is not suggested that apportionment should be taken lightly in the case of a trustee. Contributory negligence is an objective concept that depends on what the reasonable person would have done in the victim 's position. Likewise, contributory fault should be an objective concept that turns on what the reasonable person would have done in the beneficiary 's position. However, tort law allows leniency in applying the test of reasonableness; some people may take less care for their own interests than it requires people to take care for the interests of others. Arguably, similar principles should be adopted in contributory fault for our breach in question. In other words, the defence of contributory fault would still lean towards favouring the beneficiary over the trustee. Only if the trustee could establish gross negligence on the part of the beneficiary that contributed significantly to her own loss, would the trustee be entitled to apportionment. The availability of contributory fault would ease the ethical concern of trustees being liable for losses not attributable to their own carelessness, while maintaining consistency with the fiduciary or moral duties the trustee may be in breach of by virtue of our breach in question. With this form of contributory fault, there should at least be room for the introduction of contributory negligence on the part of claimants into the realm of liability of trustees for breach of their duty of care in this sense.
This is adopted from Watt 's argument for introducing apportionment in the case of bare trusts, see G Watt, 'Contributory Fault and Breach of Trust', (Winter 2005) OUCLJ 5(2), 205-224, at 214.
P Cane, The Anatomy of Tort Law (Hart Publishing, Oxford 1997), at 58-59.
P Cane, The Anatomy of Tort Law (Hart Publishing, Oxford 1997), at 59.
We highlighted the differences between a trustee 's fiduciary duty and a trustee 's duty of care and argued that the arguments against introducing contributory negligence into breach of fiduciary duty do not apply to our issue. We have also taken note of the similar positions a trustee 's breach of her duty of care and a tortfeasor is in when compared to breach of fiduciary duty. We went on to assume that fiduciary duty and a trustee 's duty of care are distinct, non-overlapping concepts in order to support the view that trustee 's breach of her duty of care is essentially the same as tortuous negligence, and that liability of trustees for breach of their duty of care is based on the principle of fault. Furthermore, we found considerable similarities between common law damages and equitable compensation and that the compensatory goals of the two remedies are essentially the same. Bearing the wide range of similarities between tortuous negligence and trustees' breach of their duty of care, we argued that the same sort of analysis in determining appropriate limitations on the two remedies should be applied. We also proposed a plausible model for contributory fault in the context of liability of trustees for breach of their duty of care.
Until an appropriate set of facts comes before the House of Lords, the principles that should be applied in determining apportionment of fault will remain unclear. However, in light of the above analysis, it is safe to say that there is room for the introduction of contributory negligence on the part of claimants into the realm of liability of trustees for breach of their duty of care.
