John Rawls, A Theory of Justice (revised edn, Oxford: OUP, 1999), p. 3.
Justice is a contentious subject which has troubled philosophers throughout time. This essay will not be a study on the theories of justice, rather it will focus primarily on the practice of law and it 's relation to justice. Therefore for the purpose of this essay I have decided to define justice in two ways: justice as truth and justice as fairness.
For example, Plato The Republic, Rawls A Theory of Justice, Dworkin The Original Position and many more. "Justice is truth in action" Benjamin Disraeli, Agricultural Distress, speech in the House of Commons (1851), taken from.
John Rawls, A Theory of Justice (revised edn, Oxford: OUP, 1999).
As it is such a vast subject area, I have decided to limit the practice of law in order to provide sufficiently detailed analysis. For the purposes of this essay I shall confine myself to the topic of evaluating the adversarial trial and whether it is conducive to supporting justice. I have chosen to do so as the adversarial trial is the most high profile and recognisable practice of law in England today. From personal experience when I tell people I'm a law student they immediately picture a criminal adversarial trial, demonstrating the importance of the adversarial trial with regards to public opinion and thus the necessity for constant academic evaluation.
In particular the adversarial trial in England and Wales.
I shall briefly describe the content of the adversarial trial and individually examine three of its defining features; witnesses, judge and jury and advocacy before concluding whether the adversarial system is capable of supporting justice.
In England the adversarial trial can be split into two distinct categories of civil and criminal. The two forms are very similar, the most significant difference being that in a civil case the judge (or bench) is the decision maker, whereas in a criminal trial this is the role of the jury, with the judge taking on the role of the adjudicator of the proceedings. I have decided to focus primarily on the criminal adversarial system due to the interesting questions posed by the relationship and roles of judge and jury.
References to England or the English legal system include England and Wales.
The adversarial trial has been defined as "...... a dispute between two sides in a position of theoretical equality before a court which must decide the outcome of the contest." Within this contest the prosecution act on behalf of the state competing against the defence with the judge acting as adjudicator and the jury as decision maker. The prosecution bear the evidential burden of adducing evidence to prove the elements of the crime alleged and satisfying the burden of proof "beyond a reasonable doubt." Evidence is adduced through oral examination, subject to the rules of evidence and controlled by the impartial judge who is also responsible for directing the jury. The role of the jury is to analyse and interpret the evidence before them and come to a valid conclusion as to whether the defendant should be convicted or acquitted.
M.R.Damaska, "Evidentiary Barriers to Conviction and Two Models of Criminal Procedure: A Comparative Study (1973) 121 U Penn. LR 506 taken from McEwan, Jenny: Evidence and the Adversarial Process: The Modern Law, Hart Publishing, Second Edition, 1998.
Miller v Minister of Pensions [1947] 2 All ER 372 Denning, J "proof beyond a reasonable doubt does not mean proof beyond the shadow of a doubt.... If the evidence is so strong as to leave only a remote possibility in his favour, which can be dismissed with "of course it is possible, but not in the least probable, the case is proved, but nothing short of that will suffice." Thus demonstrating the principle of the presumption of innocence.
The adversarial trial has come under much criticism from commentators questioning its conduciveness to discovering the truth and producing reliable evidence and questioning the influence of advocacy and the treatment of witnesses. I shall examine and respond to these criticisms through analysing each aspect in turn and determining its relevance to justice.
The examination of witnesses is one of the most fundamental and contentious characteristics of the adversarial trial. Oral evidence is the classic form of evidence in English criminal trials; witnesses are subjected to examination in chief and cross examination asking the court to consider not just the content of the witnesses' statements but also the appearance and demeanour of the witnesses'.
McEwan, Jenny: Evidence and the Adversarial Process: The Modern Law, Hart Publishing, Second Edition, 1998 P85.
Examination in chief involves the examination of witnesses from their own advocates, allowing the court to hear the evidence and decide upon it. This creates accountability of evidence or "open justice" and evidence that is both accessible and transparent to the court, as free from interference as possible. The major criticism of this is that the process of gathering and delivering this evidence is not conducive to reliability.
Oral Witness Testimony ex Criminal Evidence, Paul Roberts and Adrian Zuckerman, Oxford University Press, 2004 P214.
The memory of an event is divided into three stages; acquisition, retention and retrieval and it appears as if the adversarial trial is obstructive in aiding these stages. The retention of a memory will often depend upon numerous factors; the exposure time of the event, the frequency of viewing the event and the type of event. With regards to retrieval, it has been demonstrated that stress can increase the recall of a memory to a point, however when this becomes too intense there is often a decrease in performance. The adversarial process often requires witnesses to give evidence a long time after an event has taken place and unquestionably places witnesses under great pressure when giving evidence. Thus the adversarial process is arguably a highly inappropriate method for creating reliable evidence and hence justice.
Crowder 1976; Loftus and Loftus 1976. Taken from Perceiving Event ex. Eyewitness Testimony, Elizabeth Loftus.
Yerkes Dodson 1975 p357 Taken from Perceiving Event ex. Eyewitness Testimony, Elizabeth Loftus.
Cross-examination of witnesses is based upon the theory that evidence is tested in court and that new evidence is created though the witnesses' demeanour and delivery of evidence. Wigmore hailed cross-examination as "the greatest legal engine ever invented for the discovery of truth" and it should be acknowledged that cross-examination is a powerful tool in testing and creating evidence. However there remains much doubt and scepticism as to its value and legitimacy.
Wigmore on Evidence (Chadbourn revision) taken from Oral Witness Testimony ex Criminal Evidence, Paul Roberts and Adrian Zuckerman, Oxford University Press, 2004 P215.
Critics of cross-examination question its treatment of witnesses and the resultant effect upon reliability. Protections are afforded to witnesses through the Bar 's professional code of conduct and the need to protect witnesses from abusive cross-examination has been recognised by the judiciary. However despite these apparent safeguards, witnesses remain susceptible to attack from barristers. A recent high profile example occurred in the Damilola Taylor case, during the cross-examination of the prosecution 's leading witness a 14-year old girl. The cross-examination was described as "... both vigorous and probing..." and the Panel conceded that the adversarial process often fails to recognise the emotional and psychological consequences of cross-examination of vulnerable witnesses. In fact it has been recognised by the Home Office that cross-examination is for many witnesses humiliating and traumatic. Such treatment of witnesses must surely contravene the principle of justice as fairness and it should be questioned whether a witness should be subject to this stress and anxiety when effectively serving the criminal justice system. From my own limited experience as a witness I found the process surprisingly pressurised and stressful. I was following a script and had no intention of lying or deviating from that script, yet I felt nervous and pressurised and could well have made a mistake under the pressure. There is also the danger that excessive questioning and abusive treatment of witnesses shall prevent witnesses from testifying, further harming the access to justice.
Barristers Code of Conduct full version available online at rules relating to the treatment of witnesses can be found at paragraphs 704, 705, 706, 707 and 708 of the Code of Conduct.
In the case of Mechanical & General Inventions v Austin Motor Co [1935] AC 346, 360, HL Lord Sankey LC warned that "cross examination becomes indefensible when it is conducted without restraint and without the courtesy and considerations which a witness is entitled to expect in a Court of law".
Oversight Panel (Chair: The Rt Revd John Sentamu), The Damilola Taylor Murder Investigation Review (December 2002), paras. 5.4.16, 5.4.30-2, online at .
Above paragraph paraphrased from Oral Witness Testimony ex Criminal Evidence, Paul Roberts and Adrian Zuckerman, Oxford University Press, 2004, P 216 & 217.
Home Office, Speaking Up For Justice: Report of the Interdepartmental Working Group on the Treatment of Vulnerable or Intimidated Witnesses in the Criminal Justice System (1998, London: Home Office) para 8.53 taken from Ellison, Louise: The Adversarial Process and the Vulnerable Witness, Oxford University Press, First Edition, 2001.
In the simulated "Law in Practice" trial.
In examining why this treatment of witnesses is allowed to take place the answer must be that it is thought to be the best method of obtaining the truth and thus creating reliable evidence. However many studies have shown that this is perhaps not the case. It has been suggested that improper questioning of witnesses often distorts the fact-finding process and distracts juries. Furthermore behavioural scientists have questioned whether juries are fundamentally capable of distinguishing between truthful and lying witnesses and that generally "people are poor at judging credibility from demeanour". If so, this provides a fundamental blow to the adversarial reliance upon live oral witness testimony and its ability to support justice as both truth and fairness.
I shall examine this further when I examine the respective roles of Judge and Jury.
Wellborn (1991) Cornell LR 1075, 1081 taken from Oral Witness Testimony ex Criminal Evidence, Paul Roberts and Adrian Zuckerman, Oxford University Press, 2004, P 218.
As mentioned earlier the role of the judge is primarily that of an impartial referee, presiding over the rules of evidence and trial procedure. In reality however, the judge is much more, his role described by Denning LJ as "... to find out the truth and justice according to the law." Thus demonstrating the dilemma for the judiciary; to be the arbiter of justice and yet careful not to impinge upon the function of the jury as decision maker. In practical terms the role of the judge remains presiding over the rules of evidence and deciding whether there is sufficient evidence to satisfy the evidential burden of proof. Thus giving the judge the power to withdraw a case from the jury if the evidence is deemed insufficient to properly convict and in effect providing a check upon the power of the jury, protecting the accused from perverse verdicts.
Jones v National Coal Board [1957] 2 QB 55, 63 taken from McEwan, Jenny: Evidence and the Adversarial Process: The Modern Law, Hart Publishing, Second Edition, 1998.
Galbraith [1981] 1 WLR 1039.
R. Pattendon, "The Submission of No Case to Answer: Some Recent Developments" [1982] Crim. LR 558 taken from McEwan, Jenny: Evidence and the Adversarial Process: The Modern Law, Hart Publishing, Second Edition, 1998 P89.
In England it remains the function of the judiciary to sum up both the facts and the law to the jury, placing the judge in a position of great power. Due to the significance of such a function, it has been argued that rather than being an impartial umpire within a trial, the judge "..... and the jury try the case together and it is his duty to give them the benefit of his knowledge of the law and to advise them in the light of his experience as to the significance of the evidence.".
Lawton LJ in Mutch [1973] 1 All ER 178.
In light of all this it appears as if the role of the judge within the adversarial trial greatly supports the administration of justice. The judge will clarify evidence for the benefit of the jury, protect suspects from perverse verdicts and prevent abuses of evidence law, all of which can only support the practice of justice. One cause for concern remains the restrictions upon these powers; however the Court of Appeal has proved to be a very effective safeguard in overturning excessive use of power.
Trial by jury has long been thought of as a "cornerstone" in the criminal justice system, "12 men good and true", the heart of the English legal system. However critics have characterised the jury as "an anti-democratic, irrational and haphazard legislator, whose erratic and secret discussions run counter to the rule of law.".
Penny Darbyshire, Criminal Law Review [1991] Crim LR 740 taken from Slapper & Kelly, The English Legal System, Cavendish Publishing, Seventh Edition, 2004 P500/501.
The strength of the jury lies in trial by one 's peers, thought to be the basic symbol of justice, however increasingly doubts have been raised as to the competency of a jury. Some of the most infamous examples of jury incompetence are seen in the cases of R v Ponting and R v Kronlid where perverse verdicts have been delivered. These cases demonstrate the potential for jurors to act outside of their function against the principles of law from which they were empowered. In other circumstances jurors have been simply unable to fulfill their role through sheer inability as in the case of Ghosh . Such a case serves as an example that although the jury may in all intentions strive to serve the purposes of justice, in a minority of cases it may fail to do so.
R v Ponting (1985) WL 312100.
R v Kronlid (1995).
Ghosh (1982) QB 1053 Mr. Justice Swallow "Gentlemen of the jury, the facts of this distressing and important case have already been put before you some four or five times, twice by prosecuting counsel, twice by counsel for the defence, and once at least by each of the various witnesses who have been here; but so low is my opinion of your understanding that I think it necessary, in the simplest language to tell you the facts again.".
Another controversial issue is the ability of the jury to interpret oral witness testimony, the problem being that often people over-estimate their ability to identify persons telling the truth. Traditionally we are taught to believe that confidence and fluency are signs of honesty, however in reality these are skills which can be imitated by an able liar. Ultimately this is simply a decision to be made by the trier of fact and should perhaps be considered as a weakness in evidence, rather than a reflection of the ability of the jury and as such is perhaps an unfair consideration when deciding whether the jury is capable of supporting justice.
G.Kohnken, "The evaluation of Statement Credibility: Social Judgement and Expert Diagnostic Approaches", in J.R.Spencer, R.Nicholson, R.Flin and R.Bull (eds.), Children 's Evidence in Legal Proceedings (Faculty of Law, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 1990) taken from McEwan, Jenny: Evidence and the Adversarial Process: The Modern Law, Hart Publishing, Second Edition, 1998 P107.
Ibid.
With regards to justice as truth the jury clearly has some weaknesses in the form of perverse verdicts and jury incompetence; however this is arguably balanced by the fact that the principle of the jury and trial by one 's peers supports justice as fairness. "Lawyerisation" of the criminal trial took place in the 18 th century and has been described as "the most remarkable change that took place in English criminal procedure". This is undoubtedly true, as the influence of professional lawyers has changed the criminal process forever, one of the most important being the influence of advocacy within the adversarial trial.
Vogler, Richard: A World View of Criminal Justice, Ashgate, First Edition, 2005.
Both solicitors and barristers.
The theory supporting the adversarial trial is "....that the best way of getting at the truth is to have each party dig for the facts that help it; between them they will bring it all to light.... Two prejudiced searchers searching from opposite ends of the field will between them be less likely to miss anything than the impartial searcher starting in the middle." In doing so, an advocate is simply concerned with fulfilling their duty to their client, demonstrating justice as fairness but in reality bearing little concern for justice as truth. This was reflected within my own experiences of advocacy. I experienced a loyalty to my client and a desire to succeed, rather than a desire to discover the truth. Advocates also bear a duty to the court however again rather than furthering justice as truth this creates a situation where advocates will only bring to the courts attention evidence that is of benefit to their client.
P.Devlin, The Judge (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1979), 61 McEwan, taken from Jenny: Evidence and the Adversarial Process: The Modern Law, Hart Publishing, Second Edition, 1998 P4 "an advocate, in the discharge of his duty knows but one person in the world, and that person is his client"Lord Brougham quoted in J.Nightingale (ed) Trial of Queen Caroline, (Robins, London, 1821) taken from McEwan, Jenny: Evidence and the Adversarial Process: The Modern Law, Hart Publishing, Second Edition, 1998 P3.
Within the simulated Law in Practice trial.
Bar Standards Board Code of Conduct - Part III Fundamental Principles 301-307.
Another concern regarding the use of advocacy within the adversarial process is whether it exudes excessive influence over the outcome. Advocates are inevitably in a powerful position representing their client, bearing the responsibility for the success or failure of the case and being in a position to affect the outcome of a case. An advocate can win or lose a case through planning, their use of evidence and oral technique, however this powerful influence does n't necessarily render the system unjust. When applying the interpretation of justice as fairness it can be seen than the power and influence of advocacy could not be fairer. It is one of the fundamental cornerstones of the criminal justice system that all parties are entitled to legal advice, and as such both parties enjoy an equality of power and an ability to influence the trial.
Analysing advocacy as a whole it is clear to see that the overriding objective is not one of truth, however this is not to say that this does not arise as a consequence. As for the undue influence of advocacy, although it has been shown to be a powerful tool within the adversarial trial it is a tool available to both parties and thus fulfils the requirement of justice as fairness.
Having analysed the adversarial trial there appears to be no clear answer as to whether it supports justice. In many ways it appears that some of the basic foundations of the adversarial process are contradictory to the principles of justice; the treatment of witnesses, the reliability of evidence and the influence of advocacy.
It has been suggested that the need for truth in litigation is merely a factor and more important is acceptability and the perception of fairness. Although this may appear irrational in many ways it does make a lot of sense. The adversarial trial has been relied upon for centuries and in reality there is little real alternative in England.
Olin Guy Wellborn III, 'Demeanor' (1991) 76 Cornell LR 1075, 1092 taken from Roberts and Zuckerman: Oral Witness Testimony ex Criminal Evidence, Paul, Oxford University Press, 2004 P289.
The adversarial trial has the acceptability required and although it undoubtedly has some weaknesses, it is capable of supporting justice. However it must be recognised that the system is far from perfect and improvements must be made to allow the support of justice to continue in the future.
