The equation of the line of best fit is approximately y = -0.23x + 97.5, where x = mortality rate and y = literacy rate.
The line fits the data reasonably well, and there is evidence of negative correlation as most of the data points are close to the line of best fit. This suggests a possible link between mortality rates and literacy rates, possibly that a lower literacy rate among adult women results in higher mortality rates of the under 5 's. If this is the case, then a low literacy rate seems to have a dramatic effect of the mortality rate. The distribution of the points shows that most of the countries have a high literacy rate of over 80% and a low mortality rate of fewer than 90. The graph also shows the existence of an outlier, labelled G, referring to data collected from Guatemala.
According to the data, Nicaragua had a mortality rate of 78. Judging by the line of best fit, and using its equation, the corresponding literacy rate can be estimated to about 80.
The data refers to 1990, and at this time approximately 85% of the population of the UAE were foreign workers and their dependants, many of them oil and construction workers from Pakistan, India and other parts of '3 rd World' Asia. It is likely that there was a low literacy over this part of the population, including the women, which has therefore produced a low average literacy rate across the whole population of women (a rate of only 38). However, the majority of births will have take place into wealthier, literate, families who are resident to the UAE. These families will benefit from good medical care and education, and thus the mortality rate for these babies will be low, (a rate of only 30).
It has been suggested that considering a mortality rate of 78, Nicaragua probably had a literacy rate of about 80. However, when the history of Nicaragua is considered, this result seems unlikely. In 1990, Nicaragua was in a similar situation to Honduras and El Salvador, and particularly Guatemala. Some of these countries were recovering from civil war, and governmental corruption. As a result of these exceptional circumstances, much less money was spent on education, which accounts for lower literacy rates, despite a mid-range mortality rate. So it is more likely that the literacy rate was lower, possibly somewhere in between 47 (Guatemala) and 71 (Honduras).
There is no indication as to how the data was collected, particularly how large the sample size was. The reliability of the data as a representative of the population is therefore unclear, so it is difficult to draw any general inferences.
It may have been more likely for data to be collected from groups with high literacy and low mortality rates, as these people were probably more accessible to the data collector.
There is at least one extreme outlier, and there is a large range of data. This supports the idea that there may be many more factors involved in the supposed relationship. Ignoring these other factors simplifies the situation to such a degree that the accuracy of any conclusions could be questionable.
It is possible that each piece of data is not independent from the others. A factor may be the geographical location of countries with respect to one another, as events taking place in one area made then have a complicated effect on any neighbouring countries.
It is likely that the data was collected over a long period of time, and rates of literacy and mortality may not have remained constant over the period. This would create more complexity when comparing data.
The fall in each type of blood pressure can be calculated for each patient. Each data set can then be ordered and summarised using a stem and leaf plot and a box and whisker plot.
These stem and leaf plots show that it is most likely that a patient will experience a drop in systolic blood pressure of around 10-15%. The bimodality of the diastolic blood pressure data suggests that a patient will probably experience either a drop of around 15-20% or almost no effect at all (or a slight increase in blood pressure). 5 number summary for the fall in Systolic Blood Pressure; (3, 10, 20, 26, 33) 5 number summary for the fall in Diastolic Blood Pressure; (-4, 3, 8, 18, 23).
Although the drops in systolic blood pressure appear greater than the drops in diastolic blood pressure, as a percentage of the initial reading, captoril seems to have a greater potential effect on the patient 's diastolic blood pressure.
The plot suggests some weak positive correlation, particularly if the possible outliers, labeled A and B, are ignored. This would imply some sort of relationship between the reductions in systolic and diastolic blood pressure for individuals within this sample.
It is not clear whether or not the two groups of data were recorded on separate occasions, or at the same time. If they were recorded on separate occasions, then the time between the two tests would probably be an important factor that is n't taken into account. If they were recorded at the same time, then each of the data sets are almost certainly not independent of one another, as they both would refer to the body of the same person.
The size of the data set provided is quite small; only 15 patients. It is therefore possible that this sample is not representative of the whole population. As a result, it is difficult to draw any solid conclusions.
There are particular extreme observations which may be unreliable pieces of data. For two people, their diastolic blood pressure actually rose, which is the exact opposite case to all the other members of the sample.
It would be useful if more information about the patients was available, such as their age and the state of health besides the hypertension. Such information may be helpful in explaining some of the outlying points on the graph.
The data only concerns one usage of the drug. Repeated tests would provide more reliable data.
The graph shows positive correlation between a person 's age and their percentage fat. The sample distribution suggests that older people have a greater percentage fat than younger people. It shows that all people in the sample over 40 had a percentage fat of over 25.
There are, however, several possible outliers. The point labeled A represents a 23 year old with a percentage fat of only 9.5, and point B represents a 27 year old with a percentage fat of only 7.8. These are lower than what may be expected, judging by the rest of the distribution, but both of these points refer to males. Men generally have more muscle mass than women and therefore they have a lower body fat percentage. It is also possible that these two individuals were athletes of some sort.
There are nine pieces of data concerning people aged from 53 to 61. 7 of these have a percentage fat from 29.1 to 34.7, an interval of only 5.6 percent. The other two have a percentage fat far outside this range, and so like A, and B, could also be considered outliers.
The size of the sample is small; only 18 people, so it may not be a useful representation of a larger group.
The sample consists predominantly of women; only 4 men are featured. It is therefore not an accurate cross-section of a large population. This decreases the usefulness of conclusions applied to a general population consisting of roughly half men and half women.
Similarly, over half of the data set concerns the over 50 's, who in reality do not make up over half of large populations. Any conclusions may not be accurate when applied to younger people, particularly because two of the points in that range may be outliers.
The data set is claimed to feature only 'normal adults', but it is not at all clear as to precisely what is meant by that term. Two of the people featured in the sample, (points A and B on the graph), seem to be extraordinary, (outliers), (i.e. not 'normal'), contrary to the claim.
It is possible that this is not a random sample. The people are probably all American, since the results are published in an American Journal, and may belong to just one particular area where the data collecting took place. If this sample is not a random group, then there may not be independence between the people.
