In this study a range of polymethacrylates were synthesised via ATRP using a phenol bromoisobutyryl initiator and a variety of alkylpyridylmethanimine ligands around a copper(I)bromide catalyst. The effects of varying the length of the alkyl chain on the ligand and the type of monomer on the polymerisation was studied. Polymerisations proceeded with approximately first order kinetics, giving a narrow PDI in most cases. Butyl methacrylate polymerised at a greater rate than methy methacrylate, and shorter alkyl chains on the ligand gave a greater polymerisation rate.
Atom Transfer Radical Polymerisation (ATRP) is a recent and popular method of controlling radical polymerisation. The use of copper(I) halides in conjunction with alkyl halide initiators to mediate such a polymerisation produces narrow polydispersity indices and allows good control of polymer structure under typical polymerisation conditions.
Schiff bases such N-(n-Propyl)-2-pyridylmethanimine have been shown to be efficient catalysts for ATRP when used with copper(I) halides ,. The use of phenolic ester-based alkyl halide initiators in such a system has also been demonstrated .
Haddleton, D. M.; Waterson, C.; Derrick, P. J.; Jasieczek, C.; Shooter, A. J. Chem. Commun. 1997, 683.
Haddleton, D. M.; Clark, A. J.; Crossman, M. C.; Duncalf, D.
J.; Hemings, A. M.; Morsley, S. R.; Shooter, A. J. Chem.
Commun. 1997, 1173.
Haddleton, D. M ; Waterson, C. Macromolecules. 1999, 8732.
We investigate the effect of different pyridylmethanimine ligands on the polymerisation of methyl, n-butyl and benzyl methacrylate polymers and co-polymers using a phenolic ester based initiator.
N-(n-Propyl)-2-pyridylmethanimine and N-(n-Butyl)-2-pyridylmethanimine ligands were to be synthesised and used with 2-bromo-2-methyl-propionic acid phenyl ester as the initiator for the copper(I) bromide mediated polymerisation.
All manipulations were carried out without the aid of Schlenk apparatus. Molecular weight distributions were measured using size exclusion chromatography (SEC) calibrated with MMA standards. Corrections were made for BMA polymers. Conversions were measured by 1H NMR integration. 5.07g (53mmol) of phenol and 8.08g (80mmol) of triethylamine were added to 200ml of DCM. The solution was stirred to allow complete dissociation of the phenol. 18.40g (80mmol) of bromoisobutyryl bromide was added dropwise and the resulting exotherm controlled by cooling on ice. The reaction was allowed to stir at room temperature for 2    hours. The ammonium salt formed was removed by filtration. The reaction mixture was washed with water (50ml), saturated NaHCO 3 (50ml), and dilute HCl (50ml), then concentrated to an orange oil which was then flashed through a silica column, eluted with toluene. Yield = 14.50g (111%). NMR and IR analysis showed that toluene was still present and the product was a mixture of Phenyl bromoisobutyrate (54.2%) and the 1,5-dibromo anhydride (45.8%). See appendix for full spectral analysis.
An excess of n-propylamine (14.38g, 0.24 mol) was added dropwise to a stirred solution of pyridine-2-carboxaldehyde (21.89g, 0.20 mol) in diethyl ether (20 mL) cooled on ice. After complete addition of the amine, anhydrous magnesium sulphate (6.0g) was added, and the slurry stirred for 2 hours at 25  C. The solution was filtered, solvent removed under vacuum and the product purified by distillation under reduced pressure to give a golden yellow oil. n-Butyl methacrylate (11ml, 69mmol) and N-(n-Propyl)-2-pyridylmethanimine (0.410g, 2.8mmol) were added to 10ml toluene and degassed with nitrogen for 15mins. Anhydrous Copper(I)Bromide (0.1443g, 1mmol) was added which imparted a brown colour to the solution. The mixture was placed in an oil bath at 90  C and initiator (0.2241g) was injected. Samples for NMR and GPC analysis were taken after 2 and 4 hours. Conversion was monitored by 1H NMR integral measurements. The catalyst was removed from the samples by passing through a column of basic alumina prior to GPC analysis. After 24 hours, the polymer was precipitated into 5% dil. H 2SO 4 in methanol. Several attempts were made before the polymer was successfully decanted from the acidic methanol solution cooled by dry ice. The product was dissolved in DCM and concentrated. Yield = 8.40g. See appendix for full spectral analysis.
Ligands were synthesised in resonable yields ( 65%).
Synthesis of the homopolymers proceeded with approximately first order kinetics propducing polymers with a narrow PDI. The rate of BMA polymerisation was greater than that of MMA as expected.
The longer alkyl chain on the ligand retarded the polymerisation rate. The butyl group provides the transition metal complex with a greater affinity for the non-polar solvent. The propyl group tends to make the complex more soluble in the polar monomers, this possibly leading to a higher local concentration of monomer, aiding the reaction.
The attempted synthesis of phenyl bromoisobutyrate yielded two products. The 1,5-dibromo anhydride was produced by coupling of bromoisobutyryl bromide. Dropwise addition of the bromide to the phenol during the initiator synthesis resulted in a high local concentration of the bromide and encouraged anyhdride formation.
This had several consequences for the polymerisation step. GPC at 2hrs showed the polymerisation mixture to contain not only the phenol initiated PBMA but a polymer of roughly double its molecular weight. This is believed to be the result of the dibromo anhydride acting as a difunctional initiator. GPC at 4hrs showed a reduction in concentration of this polymer as did GPC of the final polymer product. Most of the anhydride initiated polymer was hydrolised between 2 and 4hrs in the reaction mixture and almost all the remainder was hydrolysed during the work-up. This produced a mixture of phenol and carboxylic acid    functional polymers.
The theoretical Mn at 100% conversion for the BMA reaction was 9252g.mol -1. This compares approximately with the corrected final polymer GPC result of 10049 g.mol -1, indicating that the reaction went to a high degree of polymerisation.
Two copolymers were synthesised. Both started with polymerisation of MMA. In reaction C, BzMA was added after 2 hours, and in reaction D after 4 hours.
Homopolymerisation proceeded until the second monomer was added. Statistical co-polymerisation then occurred. Unfortunately, for reaction D, as no NMR of the reaction mixture was run at 22hours, and integration of the product spectra was unreliable, we cannot determine the final conversion values. The raw conversion data for reaction C points to a copolymer rich in MMA with little BzMA incorporated. The overall BzMA conversion appeared to decrease between 2 and 4 hours. We do not understand why this is the case.
Both MMA polymers had a high Tg and were isolated as off-white powders. The MMA/BzMA copolymer in reaction C had a low Tg, and an appearance and texture similar to that of Marmite. The BMA polymer had a lower Tg (below room temperature), and was clearly capable of flow. It had an appearance and texture equivalent to Plasticine. These properties were expected. The butyl groups in PBMA reduce cohesion between the polymer chains, giving a low Tg. The methyl groups in PMMA have less of an effect on Tg. The BMA polymer had a green colour, due to the presence of the copper catalyst.
We have shown that it is possible with very little prior knowledge to polymerise methacrylates via atom transfer polymerisation using easily synthesised ligands and initiators. This study has also highlighted the need to follow such reactions more closely by frequent NMR and GPC anaylsis to support any conclusions made on reaction kinetics.
