"Sport has long been considered the generic preserve of males" (Pederson, 2002: 303; see also Hargreaves, 1994). The prevalence and extent of this hegemonic masculinity within the sporting domain has meant that women, from all ethnic backgrounds, have faced a number of barriers in their bid to participate in sports (Hargreaves, 2000; see also Tirone,al. 2000; Taylor, 2002). A review of the sociology of sport literature reveals that the mass sports media is largely responsible for reinforcing the establishment of such constraints through their disproportionate and often biased coverage of sport (references). For example, researchers have found that, when compared to the coverage of sportsmen, the sport media systematically "stereotyped, trivialised, and under-represented" sportswomen at all levels of sport (Pederson, 2002: 305; see also Salwen and Wood, 1994). Consistent with this view, researchers stipulate that the sport media, through their photographic coverage of athletes create, perpetuate, contributed to, reaffirm and strengthen hegemonic masculinity (Pederson, 2005; see also Creedon, 1994).
This study performed a content analysis of newspaper photographic coverage in order to determine whether this "coverage bias" (essentially against women) is evident in Britain. The study utilised "hegemonic masculinity" to focus on the "amount and type of newspaper photographic coverage given to male and female athletes" (Pederson, 2002: 306; see also Duncan and Brummett, 1993). As such, in keeping with the proposed research question "does the British sports media portray a coverage bias?" the following hypotheses were established: (a) male athletes/sportsmen will receive more photographic coverage compared to female athletes/sportswomen; (b) male athletes/sportsmen will receive more prominent photographic placement than female athletes/sportswomen, and (c) male athletes/sportsmen will receive photographic cover that portrays them in "action" compared to female athletes/athletes.
Sample: As it was almost impossible, too expensive and too time-consuming to sample the entire population of British newspapers, it was decided that the unit of analysis (e.g., newspaper photographs within a sporting context) should be selected from a variety of newspaper issues from those newspapers which devotes a section to sport, and those which are circulated daily on a national scale (i.e., around Britain excluding Scotland, Wales and Ireland). This would provide more representative data (see Fink, 1998) and therefore allow reliable/consistent statement(s) to me made about the population (e.g., national newspapers) from which the final sample for the study was drawn (Maxim, 1999).
In this regard, 4 of the most popular daily circulation newspapers were collected from the 23 rd of January 2006 to the 6 th of February 2006 (i.e., the sampling frame for this study was 14 days); these included the Metro, Daily mail, The Sun and the Daily Express as these were in keeping with the aforementioned sampling criterion. This produced a total sample size of 56 newspapers (14 issues from each major newspaper) over the sampling frame. These in turn yielded 296 photographs pertaining to sports athletes for the study. Due to time constraints, a simple random sample of 60 photographs was selected for analysis (e.g., photographs were given numbers and these numbers drawn out of a hat). This technique of sampling ensured that all potential units of analysis from the population of 296 photographs had an equal probability of inclusion in the final sample, and was also independent of the volition or wishes of the researcher (Maxim, 1999).
Coding: As a technique of content analysis was chosen, which when broadly defined represents a "technique used to make inferences by systematically and objectively identifying special characteristics or messages" (Holsti, 1968: 608 in Berg, 1998: 224), the criteria by which the "character of the data/content within the unit of analysis" (i.e., the proposed variables to be scrutinised from the photographs) would be analysed had to be defined, operationalized and made explicit (Berg, 1998: 224). This is known as the criteria of selection and must be formally established to reorganise the themed content before the actual analysis (Miles and Hubermann, 1994). In this respect, a coding scheme was devised to examine the photographic portrayal (the dependent variable) of gender (the independent variable) in sports through the following categories:
Amount of coverage: all 60 photographs were analysed and coded depending on whether the picture portrayed a male (code=1) or female athlete/sportsperson (code=2). Type of coverage I: coding related to the prominence given to location of these 60 photographs within the original newspaper. Hence when a photograph portraying a male/female athlete appeared on the front page and above the crease (the most prominent location), it was coded "5", when on the front page below the crease, it was coded "4", on the front page of the sports section it was coded "3", on pages 2-3 of the sport section, it was coded "2". A code of "1" was established if the photograph appeared anyway else in the newspaper (this represented the least prominent location). To reduce confusion, when referring to "a page, or a number pages", the researcher implies that both sides of a single leaf/page of the newspaper is analysed.
Type of coverage II: coding related to the context within which the male/female athlete was portrayed in the photograph. Hence when a photograph portrayed a male/female athlete in an "action shot in the sport setting," a code of "3" was given, when the athlete was portrayed in a "still pose, but within the sports setting", it was coded "2" and when an athlete was portrayed in "a still pose shot in a non-sport setting", it was coded "1". In both categories regarding the "type of coverage", a high coding score represents more prominent coverage of the athlete as well as "positive" portrayal of the athlete (e.g., in their natural setting).
As these were objective methods of analysis, I simply counted and tallied the number of times each theme occurred against the coding scheme. Any ironic/doubtful content, which could not be located within these predetermined categories (e.g., content which could not be accounted for) was coded "nine" and excluded at the data analysis phase. This was an appropriate measure as there is a tendency for the researcher to code such ambiguous content subjectively (Berg, 1998). The total amount of time spent coding was 5 hours.
A content analysis of the 60 photographs, randomly drawn from a sample population of 296 sports photographs, reveals that through their "biased" coverage, the media show sport to be the generic preserve of males. For example, this study found that male athletes received more photographic sport coverage (75%) when compared to female athletes (25%) across 56 newspapers. This difference is illustrated in Table 1.
Consistent with the latter view, it is also evident that more male sports athletes received prominent coverage e.g., front page coverage both above (31%) and below the crease (22%) of the main newspapers, in comparison to female athletes who received no front page coverage in newspapers. A similar, yet slightly less prominent difference was also revealed in the sports section of each newspaper. For example, compared to 7% of female athletes (1/15 female photograph), almost half of the male athletes (47% or 21/45) photographs received front-page coverage in the sports section of newspaper. This finding is in keeping with previous literature, which suggests that the sport media works to reinforce and perpetuate hegemonic masculinity in sporting contexts (Kane and Disch, 1993). These trends are illustrated more clearly in figure 1.
There was also a clear biased portrayal of male and female athletes. For example, whilst 71% of male athletes photographs' showed them "in action" or "on the pitch", no such photograph portrayed female athletes in this light. In stead, the larger majority of female athletes photographs showed them "posing" either in (60%) or off the sports setting (40%). Only 4% of male athletes were shown "posing" off the sports settings. This overwhelmingly stereotypical portrayal of females sitting pretty and men "in action" inculcates an ideology which considers sports to be "off limits" to females thus contributing to the establishment of barriers for females to participate in sports. (Creedon, 1994).
In conclusion, it is plausible to assume that the British print media largely provide inequitable photographic coverage of male and female athletes. As a result of such findings, researchers often stipulate that through its interpretation of events, and subsequent creation of social reality, mediated sport is presented within certain ideological discourses, which reflect existing power structures (Pederson, 2002: 304-307). Despite this however, one cannot overlook the strict limitations on the inferences the researcher makes within content analysis. E.g., inferences about motivation or intent cannot be made, nor can the researcher infer what the effect of seeing such content would be on a viewer. Likewise, since content analysis is only an analysis of what is in the text (what is presented to him/her), the researcher is limited to making inferences about the unconscious bias or unintended consequences of a text (Berg, 1998). In such instances, it would have been more feasible to employ a combination of both quantitative and qualitative techniques to provide the reader with a more in-depth understanding of this phenomenon (Selltizal. 1959 in Berg, 1993: 224). Moreover, since the analysis of data included a determination of whether there is a difference (i.e., a proportional and disproportional coverage), it would have been better to use the chi-square test, the most commonly used statistical analysis in content analysis (Riffe et al., 1998).
Bar chart illustrating the prominence of photographic coverage given to male and female sports athletes.
Insert bar chart: using this table:
