In the past two decades there has been much discussion about the nature of globalisation -the project of which has had a profound impact on both men and women alike. The strategies which have shaped this process have long been regarded as being capitalist, gender and class bias. This paper is primarily concerned with the interrelationship between gender and globalisation. It will be argued that gender relations provide the base on which the global economy has flourished. Here, emphasis will be placed on the notion that gender has not only been shaped by, but also shapes our global world. Rather than accepting unequal gender relations as an outcome of globalisation, we will show how it is these very relations which characterize its project. In this way, the paper adopts Connell 's (1987 cited in Bayes et al, 2001: 1) concept in which he sees gender as an 'active agent which creates divisions of labour, power and emotions between men and women'. Thus after briefly tracing how concepts of gender and globalisation have been reviewed, the focus of this paper will then to concentrate on examining four main issues.
Firstly, in what ways has flexiblisation of the labour force shaped the project of globalisation? We must bear in mind that for many this process does not always support and benefit women. This is true in both the initial implementation as well the final outcome stage. Secondly, how have structural adjustment programmes played a part in this process? Within both of these contexts one must consider the ways in which globalisation and capitalism have resulted in enmeshing women further into patriarchal structures. Thirdly, what has the impact of transnational migration been to globalisation? In this it is crucial to understand how gender identity has shaped these movements. We will evaluate how the nature of domestic labour has provided the base for the new global economy. Lastly are we now in an era of 'global imperialism'? How has gender shaped this terminology? Here emphasis will be placed on the importance of industries such as sex tourism and the increasing popularity of the bride trade. Consequently we will evaluate whether there has been a globalisation from below which has enabled women to resist the forces discussed above? How effective has this movement been? All of this must be well thought out before we can coherently understand the role gender plays in the project of globalisation.
As Moghadam (2006) aptly states, globalisation is first and foremost about change: political change, economic change and cultural change. It is here, within the arena of cultural change that we can argue that the formation of gender regimes goes side by side with the project of globalisation. Gordon (1993 cited in Young, 2001: 34) classifies gender as a  'series of meaning systems that are socially constructed as sexual differences within the context of systemic male domination'. Hence gender is itself a hierarchical network of social regulations which place 'women on one side and men on the other' (Kreisky and Sauer, 1995 cited in Young, 2001: 34). However that is not to say that these orders are static. The concept of gender is constantly evolving with men and women renegotiating and in most cases struggling over the accepted construction of these regimes (Connell, 1987). With this in mind the question now becomes, how is the transformation of gender related to the initial growth and spread of globalisation?.
It can be argued that gender started to shape the project of new global economy as far back as the 'golden age of capitalism' during the Fordist period of 1950 - 1973. This "golden age" was characterized by the white male breadwinner, who through sheer hard work helped build the solid foundation upon which globalisation would later flourish. However, a backward glance brings to light an alternative view of the gender structures that went hand in hand with this golden era. Women have always been central to the growth of world economy. History has tended to document their role as that of a  'supportive dependant' however, in reality the part they played was far more active than many would like to admit. It was the woman 's 'job' as a 'housewife' which enabled men to build the foundations of capitalism and globalisation. Moreover, as well as running the home and tending to the family the role of women also extended to that of a 'consumer' and it was through this mass consumption which capitalism began to thrive (Young, 2001).
So what is the situation like today? How do gender regimes shape the global culture in which we now live our lives? Whilst more women are now in positions of power within this new economy, we can resolve that little has really changed. According to Chang and Ling (2000: 27) our lives are characterized by what they have termed to be "techno-muscular capitalism (TMC)'. This reflects the 'glitzy, Internet surfing, structurally integrated world of global finance, production, trade and telecommunications, populated primarily by men and associated with western capitalism masculinity'. The story does not end there, much like the 'golden age', in order for TMC to survive there must be another labour regime which supports and drives its expansion. Change and Ling (2000: 27) characterize this second service economy as a 'regime of labour intimacy'. They argue that this group is more 'explicitly sexualised, racialized and class based' than the former and furthermore that it 'concentrates on low-wage, low-skilled service provided mostly by females'. Thus from this brief history we can now begin to trace the ways in which the project of globalisation is taking place on a gendered terrain.
Globalisation has lead to the blurring of state economic peripheries. We are now in a 'unified global order', a period which has been coupled with 'labour deregulation' and an 'interlinking economy'. These changes have led to a 'free flow of capital, people, goods and services - in which national governments are being displaced by global governance' (Ohmae, 1990 cited in Afshar and Barrientos, 1999: 2). As has been touched upon, it is arguably the exclusive male elite who have reaped the rewards of the new capitalist economy. It is this group alone which has set the agenda and which heads the process of global change. Despite small differences the principle model which can be been applied to most countries, seems to place men in the productive public sector and the concentration of unpaid female labour in the reproductive sector. Hence the patriarchal structure of the male breadwinner and the female caregiver still stands true. That being said, within this patriarchal process we had witnessed a shift to an 'open economy free market approach' (Afshar and Barrientos, 1999: 3). Within this shift Standing (1989: 1077) refers to the importance of the 'renewed surge of feminization of labour activity'. This surge has had mixed effects on both 'first' and 'third' world women, who have become 'increasingly integrated as players in the world 's production and consumption process' (Afshar and Barrientos, 1999: 10).
Following on, Standing (1989: 1077) is quick to point out that this 'feminization' is not a coincidence; the transformation is strongly associated with 'the erosion of labour regulations' - which has on the one hand 'increased women 's 'use' as workers', but has also systemically 'weakened their economic and employment security in both industrializing and industrialized countries alike'. This idea of the weakened role of women can be associated with their assumed 'domesticity'. What we are finding today is that more often that not, women 's labour is preferred to that of men 's. For multinational organisations it is this 'domesticity' which is attractive as it ensures the capitalist economy a guaranteed supply of cheap yet highly efficient labour (Afshar and Barrientos, 1999: 4). With this in mind it can be put forward that flexible work as well as the implementation of structural adjustment policies have arguably become the stepping stone on which globalisation has flourished and it is women who have been predominantly marginalised with this area. For the next section of the paper the focus will turn to examining the ways in which both of these new global issues have each in turn been shaped by gender.
From the outset it is fundamental to point out that flexible labour is built around traditional gender ideologies which place women in the home as 'carers' and men in the public sphere as 'workers'. Whilst women may work outside the home, their primary role is still seen to be as that of the 'homemaker'. According the Palmer (1991 cited in Wichterich, 2000: 98) this is termed the 'reproductive tax' which all societies both in the developed and developing world 'impose upon women as if it is god given'. Thus the economy has been shaped by the idea that women 's main labour is the 'labour of love'; anything else which they contribute to the home is seen as additional or extra which supplements the main male breadwinners wage. En Loe (1989: 163) supports this notion and puts forward that 'women workers are treated as if they are being supported at home by a man'. The presumption also tends to be that women are only working to earn 'pin money' - therefore she does not need to paid as if she was a  'serious worker' as she is simply going through a 'phase'. In addition it can be argued that the 'care economy' sustains globalisation as with women 's 'free labour, usually without Sundays or holidays off, they are subsidizing a market economy which itself operates according to quite different principles' (Wichterich, 2000: 98). Furthermore the global economy is strengthened, nurtured and sustained in two ways. Firstly by the notion of the 'love economy' in which it is deeply rooted and secondly by patriarchal ideas of family and marriage (Wichterich, 2000: 98; En Loe, 1989).
Barrientos and Perrons (1999: 150) have placed emphasis on the global food chain as an example of how gender ideologies have helped shape the flexibilisation of labour. Here they argue that women are a 'marginalised and fragmented workforce, who integration has depended upon and reinforced their dual role in the household'. In a similar way to Palmer (1991 cited in Wichterich, 2000: 98) they consider that the 'caring labour' which is assigned to women has led to many global organisations being able to justify that shift work is actually beneficial as it enables women to spend more time working in the home, which is still seen to be their primary concern. Thus patriarchal gender regimes which place women in the private sphere have been central to the increased popularity of flexible labour and the supposed ways in which it is seen to 'help women'. From their comparative study of Chile and the United Kingdom they discovered that women predominately work flexible hours in the United Kingdom so as to incorporate both 'their childcare responsibilities and their husband 's careers (Barrientos and Perrons, 1999: 161). Whilst in Chile due to the high levels of poverty women 's earnings are seen as key to the survival of the household, it is still assumed that once situations improve women will 'return to their "normal" role in the home' (Barrientos and Perrons, 1999: 158). As this study aptly highlights, it is essential that we remember that women 's flexible work, can in some ways be considered an extension of their duties at home. Furthermore it is this very extension that comes some way to explaining why female labour is undervalued both in the first and third world.
Certainly it would appear that global processes do seem to be shaped by the sexual division of labour, which places women at an unfair advantage due to their 'dual' and in some cases 'triple' burden (Hossfeld, 1990). In addition whether this work is in the United Kingdom, Chile or indeed anywhere else in the world, despite the miles, the common feature which exists in all regions is that feminized work plays a crucial role in the formation of the global political economy. From an analysis of En Loe 's (1989: 139-140) concepts it can be put forward that flexible labour is attractive to, and is in turn, shaped by women who seek such jobs because they tend to provide a better alternative that reliance on a father or husband if they are married. Furthermore, for many women being seen to be a 'dutiful' daughter is important; working flexible hours may enable sending part of their wage back to their parents who may be struggling themselves. Certainly En Loe (1989: 139 -140) argues that every woman has multiple roles to play, be it the role of a 'daughter', 'mother' or 'wife' and in many cases all three. With this in mind it can be argued that each role has a stake in shaping the process of globalisation. As she pertinently states, 'the politics of being a daughter, a mother of a wife allow for companies to recruit and control women workers and win the consumer loyalty of women buyers' (En Loe, 1989: 140). From this we can therefore assume that the 'dual' or indeed 'triple' roles of women provide the base on which the international global economy today depends.
With the above in mind it now becomes necessary to conceptualise how structural adjustment programmes have themselves been shaped by gender and the effects of these programmes on women. Moghadam (1999: 369) believes that such policies have tended to be viewed by many developing countries as the 'only solution to economic crisis' and furthermore 'as the only path to economic growth'. According to the International Monetary Fund the World bank they are designed to, 'balance budgets and increase competitiveness through trade and price liberalization, increase encouragement of foreign investment as well as upping the production of goods and services for export through the flexible labour process' (Moghadam, 1999: 369). These programmes have been controversial; it is debatable whether this "shopping list" of aims and objectives can readily be applied to many economies of the developing world. Feminist literature on structural adjustment policies has been particularly damming. It has charged such programmes with 'carrying out its objectives on the backs of the poor and especially on poor women' (Moghadam, 1999: 370). Indeed this seems to be the case; in order for these programmes to be effective, more often than not, it is women who have had to take on extra productive and reproductive responsibilities. Thus the final outcome tends to be 'an increased demand on women 's already overstretched time' which is coupled with 'adverse effects on their nutrition and health' (Commonwealth Secretariat, 1989 cited in Elson, 1994: 150).
So why have programmes which clearly disadvantage women been introduced in many developing countries? How have stereotypical gender ideologies played a role in shaping this process? Both of these are newsworthy questions which many feminist writers have come some way to answering. Much like flexible female labour, structural adjustment programmes are moulded by the notion that women, as caregivers, are able to assume extra responsibility as it is seen as within the boundaries of their 'natural role'. Palmer (1991 cited in Elson, 1994: 152) adds to this by arguing that the social aspects of gender which have shaped and defined these programmes, have inevitably led to bias against women. In other words, they have been 'distorted by gender divisions in roles and codes of behaviour'. Palmer (1991 cited in Elson, 1994: 152) goes on to make the links between 'biology' and 'culture' as a way of explaining this idea. She points to the fact that women are obliged by a male dominated society to  'supply a replacement of labour free of charge'. Furthermore it can be argued that traditional gender ideologies which emphasise the "nimble fingers" of women are pivotal in shaping structural adjustment policies. Through these structures women are perceived to have the capacity to deal with large amounts of work, and in addition will assume this extra responsibility without complaint (Moghadam, 1999: 372).
It is essential we recognise that structural adjustment polices have been viewed as an incentive by many global multinational corporations to invest in the economies of developing countries. The problem here lies with the idea of 'cheap female labour' which is  'sold' to these organisations on the basis that women have an apparent "unlimited" amount of time. This highlights how gender is shaping globalisation; typical gender ideologies which confine women to low paid work are attractive to the profit driven male elites of the West. Certainly many governments have placed a special significance on the idea as a way of staking their 'comparative advantage'. By highlighting female work as 'cost effective' it gives developing nations the competitive edge necessary to compete for multinational investment (Kurian, 1999: 178-179).
Undoubtedly it would then seem fair to argue that structural adjustment policies tend to create additional work for women, whilst at the same time, reinforce the allowed idleness of many men. The problem with this is that women are not  'superwomen'; contrary to patriarchal thought there is a limit to the amount of responsibility that can be assumed. Furthermore, Elson (1994: 152) argues that such policies are unfair as they place women in the position of having to choose how much time they 'wish to spend on childcare' and how much they are feasibly 'able to spend on childcare'. As females are unlikely to view their child as 'just another crop' its places an 'unjust emotional burden' on their already 'fragmented identities'. Again support can be found in En Loe 's (1989) belief that globalisation is shaped by the multiple roles of 'wife', 'mother' and 'daughter'. Thus the process and project of structural adjustment policies are perpetuated by the natural assumption that regardless of the role a 'women 's time can extend infinitely' (Elson, 1992 cited in Afshar and Barrientos, 1999: 5).
So having evaluated how gender has shaped the labour market and structural polices, attention can be turned to another way in which gender moulds globalisation; through migration and the domestic service industry. According to En Loe (1989: 28) migration is as much about 'ideology' as it is 'physical movement'. She characterizes it as a 'package' which contains notions of a capitalist life. In this way, we can argue that migration is shaped by the gendered assumption of what is 'women 's work' and what is 'men 's work'. If for example a European woman decides to go back to full time employment after having two children, she may have to hire a nanny to take on the domestic responsibilities which she can no longer fulfil. Her responsibilities then shift and become those of another, who more often than not, is a migrant woman who in turn has left her domestic duties to a female relative in her home country. This proves an apt example of what many academics have termed the 'buyer driven commodity chain' of globalisation in which need from the top, or in other words 'the requirements of the western women characterize and sustain the demand of paid care labour' (Yeates, 2004 :382). Thus through this process the European woman is playing her part in sustaining and furthering globalisation.
The issue now becomes, why do western women have to make such a choice? For many feminist writers this 'choice' does not actually exist. Women are 'compelled' to hire help due to constraints of gender structures. There is no doubt that globalization has been kinder to some women, many of whom are making significant inroads into traditionally male dominated positions. However this comes with the added burden of adopting 'male characteristics' which are necessary to ensure their success. We are now in an era characterized by "having it all" and for women in particular of "doing it all". The successful career women must contend with a "dual burden" which includes both her work responsibilities as well as the importance of her role as a wife and mother (Ehrenreich and Hochschild, 2002). In this way, handing over care of families and households to third world migrant women, enables for the smooth running of these women 's global lives.
Certainly gender shapes the project of globalization from the developed to the developing world for the following reason; with more women working in the global economy, and 'care deficit' increasing, western women need to find some way of filling this gap and so are turning to their  'sisters' in the third world for support (Ehrenreich and Hochschild, 2002: 1-3). However in the same way it is important that we appreciate the gender ideologies which exist in the third world 'push' these migrant women closer to the 'pull' of the west 'care deficit' and so shape globalization in reverse. Just as western women are pressured into hiring migrant help, many third world women view migration as a chance to break away from patriarchal structures which dominate their lives. For example as Ehrenreich and Hochschild (2002: 11) pertinently state, 'by migrating a woman may escape the expectation that she has to care for an elderly family member, has to relinquish her paycheck to a husband or father, or defer to an abusive husband'. With this in mind it can be argued that for some third world women emigration can be regarded as a practical response to the pressures of a male dominated society.
Furthermore it is interesting that many governments actually encourage women to migrate in search of western work. Their reasoning seems to be along the lines that women are more likely than men to send their earnings back to their 'children, parents, siblings, and wider networks of kin - and this has a significant impact on the cash strapped third world governments' (Ehrenreich and Hochschild, 2002: 7). Women are 'reminded' through government action, family words and media reporting that their 'primary role' should be that of a 'caregiver'. An example from a Filipino magazine article fittingly highlights this:
The argument bring into focus what can be considered the most problematic aspect of globalisation; the fact that it is reinforced and shaped by the 'dual roles' of women, which at the same time enable men to continue steering clear of the second shift. Indeed Elson (1994: 164) has called for the 'restructuring of gender relations at the household level' as a 'necessity' if we are to ever see a change to the project and process of globalization.
Whilst all the issues which have been discussed can be characterized as fairly new global concerns, some academics have argued that the concept of 'globalisation' is actually rooted in old world 'colonialism'. Spurr (1993 cited in Chang and Ling, 2000: 31) refers to this as the "rhetoric of empire". By this he means that the 'western colonial enterprise' may have originated from the  'sixteenth century but it lasts to the present'. In a similar way, Ehrenreich and Hochschild (2002: 4) believe that globalization is just the latter phase of imperialism. 'Northern countries extracted nature resources such as rubber, metals and sugar from colonized lands - today they also seek to extract something else - love'. Whilst this is of course an oversimplification it does raise some interesting thoughts. Through these ideas, it can argued that gender is shaping the project of 'global imperialism' and this is surfacing more and more in industries such as sex tourism and the bride trade.
Mezzadra (2005) has controversially argued that the increasing numbers of western women in the global market has created a need for men to seek pleasure abroad which in turn has shaped globalisation. These beliefs find support in the literature of Ehrenreich and Hochschild (2002: 9) who consider that 'immigrant women seem desirable sexual partners for the same reason that first world employers believe them to be especially gifted as caregivers: they are thought to embody the traditional feminine qualities of nurturance, docility, and eagerness to please'. With these thoughts in mind it does not seem unfair to argue that women cannot win. In order for western females to compete and succeed in the global economy many have to shed their femininity in favour of masculinity; they have to assimilate into male work culture in order to be  'seen' to be serious about their jobs. However at the same time, this creates a nostalgic notion among men, who crave women with traditional feminine values.
From this it can be argued that foreign women are not only providing a  'sex service' but arguably the  'service of being a 'good wife' (Mezzadra, 2005: 5). Indeed a flourishing sector in the global world seems to be centred on transnational marriage agencies. As has been reviewed, with the increased 'masculine' identities of western women there has been a growth in male demand of 'patriarchal normalization of gender roles'. Furthermore it is this gender shift which has shaped the new global movement. Organisation offering 'old fashioned women for whom their husband and family comes first' are rising in popularity (Mezzadra, 2005: 5). It almost seems ironic that the very nature of globalization and the ways in which gender has structured its expansion have left men yearning for the very same culture which was once described as 'backward' and which they tried so very hard to incorporate into the global economy.
As well the perception that foreign women are subservient they are also viewed as more 'exotic'. Increasingly we are finding that many western men are travelling to developing countries in search of the desirable 'little brown Eskimos' who performs sex with great 'tropical ardor' (Adams, 1993 cited in Chang and Ling, 2000: 37). Indeed this notion is not new; 'colonized women has served as sex objects for foreign men' long before the onset of globalization (En Loe, 1979: 44). It can be argued that both colonialism and globalization have each in turn been shaped by gender. The process of colonization projected the belief that foreign women are exotic. Furthermore it is this very notion that has been carried forward to the present day, which now shapes the global world in which we live. Therefore what seems to be the case is that gendered colonialism of the past has given way to gendered globalization of the present.
Considering the above it can be put forward that gender has shaped globalisation to the detriment of women. However, whilst of course we must recognise this new global economy is indeed based on traditional gender stereotypes and ideologies which pose problems for women, at the same time, it is important that we do not simply view women as passive individuals in this process. Many females across the world are using their 'gender' to shape globalisation to better the lives of their  'sisters' not worsen them. To not include the importance of these movements would not only present a negative, but arguably a one sided view of the complex nature of both 'gender' and 'globalisation'. To explain this further the 'Chipko' movement will be used as a case study.
The word 'Chipko' is a strategy which means to 'hug trees'. Its meaning was adopted by women in the Chamoli district of the Himalayas as a response to the felling of trees. What is interesting here is that women used their 'gendered ways' to stop this disruption to the environment. They would taunt the workers with words such as 'Oh brother-in-law, how brave you are that you lift your axe to the tree hugged by your sisters-in-law' (Weber, 1988 cited in Kaplan, 2001: 34). The power held by these women was in fact driven by their gender. Weber (1988 cited in Kaplan, 2001: 34) draws on the importance of a ceremony initiated where the women tied a thread around their brother 's wrists which symbolized their love; 'feminine ways' were played upon to shame the men into stopping the destruction of the environment. Indeed as Kaplan (2001: 34) aptly states, 'the Chipko movement developed out of these women 's acceptance of the division of labour by sex in their culture'.
What this demonstrates is that gender ideologies when used by women can shape the project of globalisation is a positive way. Whilst of course the success of this movement may be difficult to replicate elsewhere it does highlight the power that women can have as a collective. By accepting traditional stereotypes such as the 'loving' and 'dutiful' sister, who for example, ties a band of love around her brothers wrists or the 'courageous' mother, who would risk injuring herself in order to save the trees so her child will have a better life, women are 'playing' on their femininity in a way that men have been doing for generations. In 'assuming responsibility for which they had been socialized' (Kaplan, 2001: 34) women managed to humiliate their own husbands and authorities as then these men were not fulfilling their 'traditional' role, which is of course to 'protect' their women. Therefore the main message which should be taken from the 'Chipko' movement should be this; women can shape globalisation to enhance a common good by uniting as a collective and if need be by playing on their femininity.
The paper has aimed to investigate the proposition that gender is central to the project of globalisation. It has becomes clear that globalisation is in fact not only shaped by, but is also sustained by gender. Based on the discussion above it would not be unfair to argue that the global culture in which we now live our lives depends on the unpaid labour of women to survive. Certainly global processes are shaped and defined by actors even in ways which may be hard to measure. Thus women 's work needs to be seen as global process in its own right. There is now a growing awareness among academics that gender structures do indeed influence the direction of global production in a similar way to the more dominant global actors, i.e. white male elites. In this is important that we appreciate how both the 'productive' and 'reproductive' roles of women shape the process of globalisation. Furthermore it must be remembered that globalisation itself can be progressive as it can be destructive. Women can unite and use their gender to their advantage, and it doing so shape the global economy in a way which is beneficial to them. However it must be recognised that these advancements can be lost through the very patriarchal structures on which globalisation is founded.
If we are to truly change the project of globalisation we must start at the root of the problem; the gender ideologies which manifest in the private sphere. Here is where the problems of gender begin and it is these same notions which eventually find their way into the public global arena. Arguably the key to altering the process of globalisation lies in changing the gendered structures which assign women the bulk of unpaid work, on top of any paid work, as if it was natural law. In order to achieve this solidarity among women must be encouraged. This can be facilitated through services offered by women 's groups and non-government organisations that now operate within and across national and state boundaries. Indeed the irony is that these very services are themselves a result of the new global economy which has encouraged 'making the world a smaller place'. Thus, with this in mind it is hoped that with time some inroads may be made into the patriarchal capitalist world and that these roads will then connect women to stand as a collective against the inequalities of globalisation.
