In recent decades, international attention has increasingly focused on global environmental issues, as the world seeks to address concerns such as climate change, the loss of biological diversity, deforestation and soil depletion, unsustainable energy use, and contaminated water supplies.
The concern of the international community in relation to problematic environmental issues has manifested in major world conferences, including ones in Stockholm in 1972, Rio de Janeiro in 1992 and Johannesburg in 2002, as well as through the negotiation and widespread adoption of hundreds of multilateral and bilateral agreements, directly or indirectly related to environmental protection and sustainability.
United Nations Environment Programme, Report of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm, 5-16 June 1972)  at 2 January 2007.
United Nations Environment Programme, Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development ("Agenda 21") (Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992)  at 2 January 2007.
United Nations, Johannesburg Plan of Implementation (Johannesburg, 26 August - 4 September 2002)  at 2 January 2007.
For a list of major international environmental conventions and ratifications, see UNDP, The Sustainable Difference: Energy and Environment to Achieve the MDGs 332-339  at 28 December 2007.
Despite the adoption of these instruments, the health of the planet has continued to decline, with an inevitable impact upon the health of its human inhabitants. These circumstances, in turn, have contributed to, or exacerbated, the major development challenges of the 21 st century, including widespread poverty, disease epidemics, conflict over resources and the deep social inequalities and hardships faced by many of the world 's poor. However, the effects of these problems are not experienced uniformly around the world. Substantial quantitative and qualitative evidence has demonstrated that women, particularly in developing countries, disproportionately experience the impacts of environmental degradation and its related human development issues.
Annie Rochette, 'Transcending the Conquest of Nature and Women: A Feminist Perspective on International Environmental Law' in Doris Buss and Ambreena Manji (eds), International Law: Modern Feminist Approaches (2005) 203, 204.
In light of this current reality, this essay examines the extent to which the environmental sustainability statement of the Millennium Declaration, as a major benchmark for the international community in relation to environmental sustainability, is currently viewed from a feminist perspective and, further, considers the potential for the adoption of a women-focused human rights approach to environmental sustainability to strengthen this perception. The purpose of this enquiry is to contribute to the task of bridging the gap between the intentions of apparently gender-neutral international environmental instruments and the realities of women 's daily lives, through the application of human rights law.
United Nations Millennium Declaration, UN Doc A/RES/55/2  at 2 January 2007.
The first part of this essay will outline the environmental sustainability goal of the Millennium Declaration and will consider the extent to which it is framed within a gendered approach to development. The second part of this essay will illustrate how the adoption of a women-focused human rights-based approach can widen and strengthen the understanding of the relationship between women and environmental sustainability. Finally, this essay will consider the potential for applying this understanding as a foundation for the mainstreaming of women 's human rights into country reporting in relation to the environmental sustainability goal of the Millennium Declaration.
In September 2000, 189 world leaders adopted the Millennium Declaration, a United Nations General Assembly Resolution setting out eight Millennium Declaration Goals (MDGs), with associated targets and indicators, with the objective of achieving a more sustainable world by 2015. The MDGs address extreme poverty and hunger, primary education, gender equality, child mortality, maternal health, HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases, environmental sustainability and global development partnerships.
For an overview of the UN Millennium Development Goals and specification of each of the accompanying targets, see the UN Millennium Development Goals website at .
Whilst the MDGs form only a part of the international framework concerning development issues, human rights and poverty reduction, the significant timing and almost universal acceptance of the Millennium Declaration has ensured the MDGs' position as an authoritative measure for the international community.
In considering whether the MDGs are framed within a gendered perspective to development, it is noted that MDG 3 is an explicit recognition of the need for the promotion of gender equality and women 's empowerment, although its sole indicator is limited to the elimination of gender disparity in education. In relation to the MDGs generally, influential development organisations around the world have reaffirmed that the issue of gender equality is not limited to a single goal, but applies to each of the MDGs and it is generally accepted that the MDGs "cannot be achieved without an understanding of women 's distinct roles and needs".
Ibid. The MDG 3 is to "Promote Gender Equality and Empower Women", with its target requiring countries to "Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education preferably by 2005, and at all levels by 2015".
UNDP, UNIFEM, UNFPA, The World Bank and the OECD/DAC Network, Gender Equality Gender Equality & The Millennium Development Goals (2003)  at 28 December 2006.
Rebecca Pearl, Common Ground: Women 's Access to Natural Resources and the United Nations Millennium Development Goals (2003) Women 's Environment & Development Organization 4  at 2 January 2007.
In order to consider whether this stated theoretical gender foundation operates in practice to ensure global justice for women in the context of environmental sustainability, MDG 7 will be examined in more detail. MDG 7 is entitled "Ensure environmental sustainability" and is divided into three parts as follows:
Above no 7.
Whilst the parts are unquestionably interrelated, it is beyond the scope of this essay to examine each of the above targets. Accordingly, this essay will focus on the first component of MDG 7. The formal indicators for this component are as follows: proportion of land area covered by forest, ratio of area protected to maintain biological diversity to surface area, energy use per $1 GDP, carbon dioxide emissions per capita and consumption of ozone-depleting chlorofluorocarbons, proportion of population using solid fuel.
United Nations Statistics Division, Millennium Development Goals Indicators (2003)  at 2 January 2007.
The progress of the MDGs is formally monitored through a procedure whereby governments around the world submit country specific reports in relation to the implementation of each MDG, including information concerning each of the goal indicators. These reports are generally prepared by the government of the country, with assistance from relevant United Nations departments and agencies, as well as academic and civil society contributors where appropriate. As the MDGs have arguably become one of the major reference points for pro-poor and social welfare policy making, particularly in developing countries, MDG 7 country reports are indicative of the background and direction of national policy in relation to environmental sustainability around the world.
United Nations Development Programme, Country Reports  at 6 January 2007.
In June 2005, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) published its review of country reporting in relation to the monitoring of the environmental sustainability aspect of MDG 7, entitled "Environmental Sustainability in 100 Millennium Development Goal Country Reports". Despite the international confirmation, noted above, that successful achievement of the MDGs requires a gendered approach, the report contains minimal references to gender.
United Nations Development Programme, Environmental Sustainability in 100 Millennium Development Goal Country Reports (2005)  at 28 December 2006.
Similarly, a second 2005 UNDP report, entitled "En Route to Equality: A Gender Review of National MDG Reports notes an "almost total invisibility of gender concerns" in relation to MDG 7. This is despite the recognised wealth of advocacy and research on the interplay between gender issues, the environment and development in the past decades. In the 78 detailed country reports submitted and reviewed by the UNDP, only eight reports made mention of women as stakeholders in environmental issues.
United Nations Development Programme, En Route To Equality: A Gender Review of National MDG Reports (2005) 46  at 28 December 2006.
Ibid 47.
Ibid 46.
Further, it was noted that almost all of the reports approached the environmental sustainability issues from a "technical perspective", without regard to their gender dimension. In response to the narrowness of this approach, several commentators have argued that the vague indicators of the MDGs have resulted in a lack of direction for country monitoring in relation to MDG 7 and have recommended the introduction of mandatory reporting on additional specific gender-based indicators.
Ibid 47.
Ibid 53.
It would be short-sighted and potentially misleading to simply conclude from the UNDP reviews of recent MDG 7 country reports that gender issues in relation to environmental sustainability are of no concern whatsoever in the individual countries. However, the implications of this lack of gender focus are significant in terms of the extent to which MDG 7, as currently approached, can effectively result in positive change for women.
The near invisibility of women 's issues in country reporting on environmental sustainability is "both a reflection of and a contributor to the gap between environmental policies and gender equality concerns". Despite the clear and extensive involvement of women in the use and management of natural resources like water and forests, they are commonly not recognised either as stakeholders in policy making or as significant actors in the conservation of these resources. This is illustrated by the patterns of participation in the environmental movement, with a mostly male leadership of large environmental organisations and with women making up the bulk of less influential administrative and volunteer positions within such organisations.
UNDP, above no 15, 46.
Annie Rochette, 'Transcending the Conquest of Nature and Women: A Feminist Perspective on International Environmental Law' in Doris Buss and Ambreena Manji (eds), International Law: Modern Feminist Approaches (2005) 203, 204.
Compartmentalisation of issues can lead to a sidelining of women 's human rights from mainstream international human rights discourse. In this regard, not requiring countries to provide, for example, sex disaggregated data in relation to each of the MDGs, lessens the strength of the indivisibility and interdependency of the MDGs. Further, limiting commentary on gender issues to MDG 3 in country reports arguably presents a distorted understanding of the reality in the particular country.
For a discussion of the evolution of international legal instruments dealing specifically with women and the failure of such to integrate women 's human rights into the mainstream human rights framework, see: Shaheen Sardar Ali, Gender and Human Rights in Islam and International Law: Equal before Allah, Unequal before Man? (2000) ch VI.
UNDP, above no 15, 3. Consider for example the overarching framework for women 's human rights provided by the Convention for the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the CEDAW, ICESCR, the Beijing Platform for Action, ILO Convention on Decent Work and other related international instruments.
The MDGs have established a minimum standard which countries have committed to use as a benchmark for their development policies. However, in circumstances where countries do not introduce an effective gender component into all aspects of their MDG implementation, and do not provide statistics and implement policies specifically concerning the relationship between women and the environment, the result is a possible "lowering of the bar" in relation to gender issues, when compared to the more comprehensive framework for women 's development which has been developed over time.
Ibid 54.
Because of these implications, it is important to consider what approach can be taken to improve the position of women in the current MDG framework.
This part of the essay seeks to illustrate how the adoption of a women-focused human rights-based approach can widen and strengthen the understanding of the relationship between women and environmental sustainability, and assist in the move towards a lessening of the apparent division between the promise of MDG 7 and the realities of many women 's lives.
In this regard, the human right to health, as it relates to women and the environment, is discussed below. It is beyond the scope of this essay to provide a comprehensive outline of all instances where a women-focused human right may relate to the environment. Indeed, given the indivisibility and interdependence of all human rights, it should be presumed that this type of approach could be extended to all human rights.
The right to health finds expression in many international legal instruments and should be understood as more than simply the absence of disease.
See generally, Brigit Toebes, 'The Right to Health' in Eide, Asbj  rn, Catarina Krause and Allan Rosas (eds), Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (2nd ed, 2001) ch 17, for a useful overview of the scope and evolution of the right to health.
The connections between the right to health and environmental sustainability become apparent when considering that the underlying preconditions for human health include adequate sanitation, safe drinking water, sufficient food resources, proper nutrition and control of disease. As environmental risk factors account for almost one-fifth of the total disease burden in developing countries, improvements in health are "as dependent on...environmental conditions...as they are on improved medical and clinical conditions.".
Don Melnick, Jeffrey McNeely, Yolanda Kakabadse, Guido Schmidt-Traub, Robin R. Sears, Environment and Human Well-being: a Practical Strategy (2005) UN Millennium Project Task Force on Environmental Sustainability 30.
UNDP, UNIFEM, UNFPA, The World Bank and the OECD/DAC Network, above no 9.
In many rural areas of low-income or post-conflict countries in particular, a gender-based division of familial chores will mean that women act as the primary managers of domestic energy resources and the living requirements of their families. Where potable or free water is unavailable locally due to adverse environmental conditions or policies, the task of water collection generally falls to women (and girls), often necessitating frequent travel over long distances in harsh conditions. This can result in severe physical effects over time as women, with an average lifting strength of around half that of men, are prone to musculoskeletal disorder. This water collecting burden also relates to both the right to education for girls and young women, and the realisation of an adequate livelihood, as the time engaged in the collection of water inevitably reduces time that could otherwise be spent studying, or pursuing income-generating activities.
Article 14 of CEDAW explicitly recognises the problems faced by rural women.
See for example: UNIFEM, UNIFEM Concept Paper: Promoting and Protecting Women 's Right to Water in the Context of Globalization and Feminized Poverty; COHRE, Source No. 8: Legal Resources for the Right to Water: International and National Standards (2003), 4.
World Health Organisation, Gender, health and Work (2004) 1-2   at 10 January 2007.
Melnick, McNeely, Kakabadse, Schmidt-Traub, Sears, above no 26, 28.
The collection of sufficient fuel in, for example, deforested regions, is an additional arduous and time-consuming chore for many women, with similar consequences. Further, in the absence of clean and cheap fuel, women are obliged to use energy sources such as dung, wood or biomass fuels, with resulting danger to their health from the indoor air pollution and waste products of such fuel.
UNDP, above no 15, 45.
Where soil depletion has occurred, women face difficulties in engaging in successful survival agriculture; the resulting food deficit and effect on satisfactory nutrition causing or exacerbating health problems for women and their families.
In many circumstances, an artificial divide between the public and private realms gives rise to the lack of an active participatory role in environmental policy-making for women. As a consequence, local norms and practices entailing male prerogatives in the control of access to and distribution of natural resources may deny women participation in, for example, water management reform systems or agrarian reform policies, with a resulting lack of control over and consequently vulnerability in relation to natural resources and common land. When those in power decide to alter the status quo, for example, by introducing "restrictions on access to forests, leasing or sale of common lands to private entrepreneurs and conversion of common lands to other uses", women are disproportionately impacted where they rely on survival agriculture on common lands. In such situations, the relationship between women and the environment is linked to both the right to health and the right to political participation.
See generally, Rochette, above no 21, for a discussion of the structural barriers to women 's participation in environmental decision-making.
Hellum, Anne, 'Towards a Human Rights Based Development Approach: The Case of Women in the Water Reform Process in Zimbabwe' (2001) 1 Law, Social Justice and Global Development .
UNDP, above no 15, 45.
See, generally: Tony Evans, Tony, 'A Human Right to Health?' (2002) 23 Third World Quarterly 197, for an interesting discussion regarding the artificial distinction between civil and political rights and economic, social and cultural rights, in the context of the right to health.
Another element in the relationship between women 's right to health and the environment is women 's reproductive role in society, which dictates an inextricable link between the health of women and that of their unborn children, and consequently the health of the community generally. Physical exhaustion caused by frequent weight-bearing activity (particularly in hot climates) exacerbates the already adverse effects of poor nutrition, especially if the woman is anaemic, leading to heightened risk of miscarriage and haemorrhage during childbirth, shorter gestational periods, low birth weights and the lowered nutritional content of breast milk.
Melnick, McNeely, Kakabadse, Schmidt-Traub, Sears, above no 26, 28.
William A. Ryan, Female Medical Teams in Pakistan Reach More Women and Save More Lives than before the Earthquake Women 's Human Rights Net (2006)  at 9 January 2007. Ryan notes the finding that nine out of 10 pregnant women were found to be anaemic in earthquake-torn parts of Pakistan.
See, generally: Institute of Medicine, Nutrition Issues in Developing Countries: Part I: Diarrheal Diseases, Part II: Diet and Activity During Pregnancy and Lactation (1992) chs 4-5.
The preceding section of this essay outlined, through the example of the right to health, how the international human rights framework can be used to provide an expanded definition of the relationship between women and environmental sustainability. This essay concludes with a consideration of the potential for using such a women-focused human rights approach as a foundation for the mainstreaming of women 's human rights into country reporting in relation to MDG 7.
The international human rights regime provides a highly legitimate and authoritative discourse in which to frame social and political inequalities and to challenge the traditional legal and social order by demanding the enjoyment of legal rights. In the absence of an express substantive environmental human right, a human rights approach provides a legally binding framework which provides a platform on which to claim that national environmental policy making and related MDG 7 reporting should incorporate a gender focus.
Hilary Charlesworth, Christine Chinkin and Shelley Wright, 'Feminist Approaches to International Law' (1991) 85 Australian Journal of International Law 613, 638. For a discussion of the power of human rights as a framework, and responses to criticisms of the use of such framework by various commentators, see for example: Hilary Charlesworth, 'What are "Women 's Human Rights?"' in Rebecca J. Cook (ed.), Human Rights of Women: National and International Perspectives (1994) 58, 60-62; Martha Minow, 'Interpreting rights: An Essay for Robert Cover' (1987) 96 Yale Law Journal 1860, 1910.
For an interesting discussion in relation to the existence of an environmental human right, whether procedural or substantive, in the current international and regional human rights framework, see generally, Gunther Handl, 'Human Rights and Protection of the Environment' in Eide, Asbj  rn, Catarina Krause and Allan Rosas (eds), Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (2nd ed, 2001) ch 17.
Whilst no single 'woman 's voice' exists in a diverse world, the human rights discourse can provide a framework within which to encourage an expanded comprehension of the relationship between women and environmental sustainability, which can then be applied by women 's rights advocates and other actors to address local circumstances, as appropriate.
Despite the existence of extensive literature regarding environmental sustainability, divergent definitions and competing visions of the concept exist at both a global and a local level. With a malleable concept, there is opportunity to advocate for a gendered approach. In this regard, whilst some commentators criticise the MDGs on the basis that they are too general, I suggest that the women-focused human rights approach outlined above (through the example of the right to health) may be employed to the advantage of women 's issues as it allows considerable scope within which to adopt appropriate gendered approaches to environmental sustainability that are applicable to local concerns.
Charles E. Di Leva, 'Sustainable Development and the World Bank 's Millennium Development Goals' (2004-2005) Natural Resources and Environmental Law 13, 14. Leva describes various understandings of the term "environmental sustainability".
Ibid.
The need for "broad public participation" has been recognised as important in the protection and conservation of the environment and the move towards sustainable development. Accordingly, encouraging a shift in consciousness to take into account a gendered perspective towards environmental sustainability is likely to require a multidisciplinary approach, involving political campaigning, strategic litigation where appropriate, and the direct and extensive involvement of local communities, women 's human rights advocates, academics, grassroots organisations, and non-governmental organisations, in partnership with the governmental and market sectors of society.
Handl, above no 41, 318.
Ibid. Handl notes the need for the "cooperation of all sectors of society" in the conservation of the environment and move towards sustainable development.
The various individuals and entities can use human rights to link their individual areas of concern, for example women 's housing rights or girls' education, to environmental sustainability and then exert pressure on governments, national women 's commissions and relevant UN agencies to include these concerns in MDG 7 reporting. This could be achieved in a multitude of ways, including political campaigning, strategic litigation where appropriate, the production of shadow MDG 7 reports and input into the state-produced MDG 7 reports.
In terms of possible additional indicators to be adopted by countries to measure their implementation of MDG 7, the UNDP Practice Note in relation to reporting on MDG 7 progress recommends the establishment of country-specific targets adapted to local concerns and priorities. Women 's rights advocates can and should use women-focused human rights based arguments to promote additional indicators that are of particular relevance to the women in their countries.
United Nations Development Programme, Monitoring Country Progress Towards MDG7: Ensuring Environmental Sustainability Practice Note (2005) 6  at 6 January 2007.
Whilst MDG 7 is arguably broadly framed within a gendered perspective, when considered in the context of the MDGs generally, a review of recent country-specific reporting in relation to this application of this goal has revealed that there is a current lack of gender focus in relation to this goal.
The UNDP has stated that the MDGs "are intended to catalyse a collective commitment to social transformation." I suggest that the women-focused human rights based approach to environmental sustainability, as outlined above, has the potential to assist women 's rights advocates to direct this social transformation to meet the specific needs of women in different countries.
UNDP, above no 15, 56.
Such an approach could, through the application of human rights law, effectively contribute to the task of bridging the gap between the intentions of MDG 7, as an apparently gender-neutral international environmental instrument, and the realities of women 's daily lives in order to effect practical change and achieve global justice.
