The above proverb was quoted by James Wolfensohn, President of the World Bank, 1995. He argues that educating girls has a catalytic effect on the economic development which includes higher productivity and faster economic growth. However, in many countries, especially in the developing countries, males get higher level of schooling than female, i.e. there is an educational gender gap.
It is believed that female and male education has affected output and growth in different ways. Female education, as with male education, can improve productivity and contribute directly to the output of the economy and, indirectly, through social gains by reducing fertility and infant mortality(especially in developing countries), improving family and child health, and increasing the quantity and quality of children 's educational attainment.
Studies using cross-country macro-level data pick up not only the direct effects of female education, but also the indirect effects not captured using micro level data.
The aim of this paper is to estimate a neoclassical growth model that includes male and female education as separate explanatory variables. The average long-run effects of male and female education on output per worker are estimated for a cross-section of countries using long time averages of the data. The results support the World Bank 's emphasis on the importance of female education in raising labour productivity.
This paper follows the paper by Stephen Knowles, Paula K. lorgelly and P.Dorian Owen. (2002). 'Are educational gender gaps a brake on economic development?' They based their results on data obtained for a mixed group of countries for the period 1960 to 1990 using OLS on time averages of the data and concluded that female education contributed significantly to the labour productivity across countries.
The following paper uses the same technique for a sample of 38 countries consisting of developed and developing countries over the period 1995 to 2004 and attempts to prove that female education plays a significant role in the overall development of the economy.
Previous empirical work on this topic, the formation of the model, the data and the estimation techniques used, and the results will be reported in the subsequent sections.
The cross-country macroeconomic literature seems far from reaching a common consensus on the role of female education. Some studies report OLS regressions with positive effects of both male and female education on growth. For example, Benovat (1989) reports the above result using primary and secondary school enrolments. However, since none of the regressions use both male and female enrolments in the same equation, the results may not be significant for the study of gender gaps in education.
Hill and King (1995) go one step ahead and introduce educational gender gap in cross-sectional output regression. They also use school enrolments as a proxy for level of education. Their results show a positive significant impact of female education on GDP. According to them the social benefits of women 's education range from improving economic growth to increasing life expectancy in the population, to improving the functioning of the political processes.
By contrast, Barro and Lee (1994) find that there is a significant negative partial correlation between economic growth and female secondary schooling. They use average years of schooling instead of enrolment rates. They explain the negative coefficient as a result of backwardness due to a high spread between male and female secondary educational attainment. This in turn would mean a higher growth potential through the convergence mechanism. However, according to Sims, C.A (1996), a major problem with the results of these studies is that the equations estimated are ad hoc and it is not clear how the coefficients are to be interpreted.
The studies by Barro include life expectancy as a proxy for health component of human capital. According to Knowles and Owen, when education is not aggregated by gender it is not statistically significant in models that include life expectancy. The level of educational attainment then has no explanatory power for growth.
In response to the problems above, Caselli et al (1996) re-estimate Barro and Lee 's equations using GMM estimator. They obtain a significant positive coefficient on female schooling and a negative one on male schooling. They argue that female education captures the positive fertility effects and negative human capital effects, former outweighing the latter. Male education on the other hand only represents the human capital effects and therefore has a negative coefficient.
Other studies, e.g. Knight et al (1993) using five-year panels find education to have significant negative effect. They assume that this could be due to five-year intervals being too short to account for the effect of education on growth. They argue that cross-sectional data using time averages may be the preferred proxy in estimating the effects of human capital investment on growth.
It is to be noted that one thing that all the studies in this area have in common is the lack of explicit theoretical framework. This makes coefficients on variables difficult to interpret.
The model used is a MRW-style neoclassical growth model. Here male and female education and health capital are entered as separate factors in the production function. The equation to be estimated is: (1).
Where subscripts i and t denote country i and time period t respectively.
Y/L denotes values of real output per worker. s ki is the fraction of real output invested in physical capital. x it is the stock of health capital ef is the stock of female education em is the stock of male education. It is to be noted that lower case letters denote quantities per effective unit of labour. n is the growth rate of labour force, g is the growth rate of technology (assumed to be constant across countries) and    is the rate of depreciation, which is assumed to be common across countries and time. It is to be noted that the model assumed steady-state relationships.   it is the error term.
Note that the coefficients on log (s ki) and on log (n + g +   ) should sum to zero. If the null hypothesis of a valid restriction is accepted then the restricted version of the equation can be used to infer values of   f,   m, and    more accurately.
The real GDP per worker (Y/L) is the dependent variable and s ki, n i + g +   , ef, em and x it are the independent/explanatory variables.
The model seeks to find the relationship between the dependent and the independent variables and to determine how significant the coefficients are, especially the female education, in determining the output per worker/ labour productivity. A significant positive coefficient on female education would imply that efforts should be made to reduce the educational gender gaps in order to have world development.
It is to be noted that in cross-section estimation any unobservable country specific effects enter the error terms in estimated equations and OLS and GLS-type methods yield consistent estimates only if the country-specific error terms are uncorrelated with the explanatory variables. This could bias the results. An additional source of bias could result from the potential endogeneity of the explanatory variables as life expectancy, schooling levels and population growth are all likely to depend on a country 's level of output per worker.
Y/L, Real GDP per worker is taken from the Penn World Tables version 6.2. Annual data was logged and then averaged over the period 1995 to 2004. s k , is the ratio of gross fixed capital formation (a proxy for capital investment) to real GDP. Data on GFCF (in US $) was taken from UNCTAD and the data for Real GDP (in US $) was taken from the IMF. The annual data was logged and then averaged over the period 1995 to 2004. n i + g +   , Adjusted growth rate of labour force. The growth rate of workforce (n) was calculated using the employment data from ILO database. It was calculated for ech year. (g +   ) was assumed equal to 5% . (n i + g +   ) was logged and then averaged over the 10 year period. ef, average number of years of schooling attained by females from primary to tertiary level was taken from UNESCO. Data on average years of schooling has been widely used as a proxy for stocks of educational human capital. The annual data was logged and then averaged over the period 1995 to 2004. em, average number of years of schooling attained by males from primary to tertiary level was taken from UNESCO. The annual data was logged and then averaged over the same period. x, the shortfall in life expectancy at birth (LE) from 85 years. Data on life expectancy measure mortality rather than morbidity. It could be argued that when examining the relationship between health and labour productivity, data on morbidity is preferable. The data used are annual from World Bank social indicator 's of development. The shortfall in life expectancy is calculated as log(x) = -log (85-LE). The data were logged and then averaged for the period 1995 to 2004.
The sample consists of 38 countries including developed countries of Europe and developing countries of South Asia and Africa. The data was collected for years 1995 to 2004 for all the six variables in the equation (1) mentioned under model specification.
Annual data was logged and then averaged over the period of study for each variable. OLS was used to estimate the following equation:
The results obtained are given in table 1 in the appendix.
The coefficient on female education is positive and is statistically significant, whereas the coefficient on male education is not statistically significant from zero.
The implication could be that countries with higher level of female schooling would have higher levels of labour productivity, ceteris paribus.
One possible economic interpretation of the negative coefficient on male education could be that as the level of female education has a significant positive impact on GDP, large gender disparities in educational attainment associated with lower levels of GDP could mean that for given levels of female education, higher levels of male education reduce GDP . The coefficient on life expectancy is very significant and positive implying that life expectancy affects the labour productivity significantly.
According to the paper by Knowles and Owen,.
Although schooling data is widely used as a proxy for educational human capital, recent work by Fuente (2000) on schooling data for a sample of OECD countries suggests that the data may be subject to a measurement error.
Sen(1998) argues that morbidity data may not be consistent across countries because of the subjectivity involved. In such situations, data on mortality may be more adequate.
The coefficients on the ratio of gross fixed capital formation to real GDP and the adjusted growth rate of workforce are positive but insignificant. This could be due to the inclusion of life expectancy that makes the other coefficients insignificant.
It is to be noted that when the equation is estimated without life expectancy, GFCF/RGDP becomes extremely significant. The results are reported in table 2 in the appendix.
The R squared values in table one and two are 85% and 79% respectively showing that the model is explained accurately by the explanatory variables. The adjusted R squared values are also very high. The probability of F-statistic in both the tables is very low (zero) implying that the null hypothesis of coefficients being zero is rejected and the model explains the variables well.
To check whether the distribution is normal, that is, whether the error term has same distribution over all i we conduct the normality test. The results are reported in figure 1 in the appendix. The p-value is 0.155060 which implies that the null hypothesis of the distribution being normal is not rejected at 1% level of significance. This means that the errors are independently and identically distributed {iid (0,   2)}.
As mentioned earlier in the paper, the model is tested for the restriction that the coefficients on log (s ki) i.e. the ratio of GFCF to RDGP and on log (n + g +   ) i.e. the adjusted growth rate of labour force sum to zero. If the null of this restriction is accepted then the restricted model can be used to infer the other more important coefficients whose values we are interested in (  f,   m, and   ). To test this restriction Wald test is used.
The restrict to be tested is c(2)+c(3)=0 . The results are reported in table 3 in the appendix. The p-value of the F-statistic is 0.1031. Even though this is a borderline case it implies that the null of the restriction is not rejected and the restriction is valid.
Now, to check whether the variance of the error (unobservable) term is constant over all i or varies over i we conduct the heteroscedasticity test on the estimation equation. Incase of presence of heteroscedasticity using OLS may lead to invalid inference on significance of coefficients and of tests of restrictions and therefore either GLS should be used or measures need to be taken to correct the variance of the OLS estimator.
The results of the White heteroscedasticity test are reported in table 4. The p-value of the F-statistic is 0.001408 which implies that the null hypothesis of homoscedasticity is rejected.
To correct for the variance, White Heteroscedasticity-Consistent standard errors and covariance is used. Once this is done the t-statistics are become accurate and the model can be interpreted more accurately. The results of the test are shown in table 5 (a) in the appendix.
The results of the regression of estimated equation using HSCEs are not too different from the original results. Some of the p-values have marginally changed but the significance of coefficients and the signs on them are still the same. Female education and life expectancy are the only two variables that are significant as before.
When a test of the restriction is conducted, the p-value of the F-statistic is much higher (0.1980) than before and the null is easily rejected. See table 5 (b) in the appendix.
Table 5 (c) shows the results of the equation after using HSCEs and taking the restriction into account .i.e. only the male years of schooling, female years of schooling and life expectancy are take as explanatory variables.
Now, the model assumes a linear relationship between the dependent and the independent variable. However, a there is a possibility that the model suffers from functional for misspecification when it does not properly account for the relationship between the dependent and the observed explanatory variables. Such models may be linear is parameters but non-linear in variables. Even though OLS can be used to estimate such equations but this may lead to biased estimations of the coefficients.
To test whether a linear functional for is adequate or not we use the Ramsey RESET test. RESET adds polynomials in the OLS fitted values to the equation to detect functional form misspecification. However, it is to be noted that the null hypothesis of the equation being correctly specified could be rejected because of an omitted variable rather than a functional form.
The results of the RESET test are reported in table 6 in the appendix. The p-value of the F-statistic is 0.000717 which implies that the null of a properly specified model is rejected. One possible reason for this could be the non-inclusion of certain variables in the equation that affect real GDP per worker .e.g. the level of technology or the level of public expenditure on education or the quality of education, etc.
It is widely believed that the educational gender gaps are much greater in the developing countries as compared to the developed ones. Excluding the developedcountries from the sample and using OLS to estimate the equation for the developing ones gives puzzling results.
The coefficients on male and female education are positive but statistically insignificant although the coefficient on female education is higher than that for male education. The only significant variable is life expectancy. Results are reported in table 7 in the appendix.
One of the reasons to believe that the coefficients may be biased is that data for growth rate of workforce and average years of schooling was not available for some countries for the whole period and averages were take for the number of years data was available. Also, the results of the RESET test show that the model is not clearly specified and there could be a bias due to omission of certain important variables.
It is to be noted that the p-value of F-statistic for the Ramsey test is much higher as compared to the sample consisting of both developed and developing countries. Also, the test for heteroscedasticity shows that the null is not rejected as the p-value of the F-statistic is 0.265427. The results of the Ramsey RESET test and the heteroscedasticity test are given in tables 8 and 9 respectively in the appendix.
The aim of this paper was to see whether increasing female schooling leads to higher levels of labour productivity across countries and whether educational gender gaps are an impediment to economic development. Although the existing papers using cross-country macro level data have failed to reach a common conclusion and this paper is not free from bias in the data, the results obtained support the World Bank 's claim about the importance of female education in improving output per worker. Therefore, a reduction or elimination of the prevailing educational gender gaps would lead to overall development across countries through the convergence mechanism.
