The current scenario of international taxation, governed chiefly by a network of 2500 bilateral treaties to avoid double taxation and tax evasion in force - most of them based in the United Nations (UN) and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Model Conventions on Income and Capital - , appears stable to a point that it might not seem unreasonable to contend that, especially in view of the latest developments, at least some of the main rules embedded in the Model Conventions would by now be part of international law. Moreover, experiences such as tax harmonisation and cooperation within a supranational space such as the European Union, with the adoption of a multinational V.A.T., seem to point to a bright future for our subject.
OECD publishes a new, updated version of its Model Tax Convention, available at , accessed April 15, 2007.
Yet, neither is international taxation limited to agreements to prevent overlapping tax claims between countries, nor has the scenario always seemed so reassuring. Instead, the current state of international taxation is the outcome of a long thread of events which reflect the quest of government to enforce tax legislation within and outside their borders, upon both its nationals and aliens. Throughout the stages of this legal battle, even the legal concept of territory has been shaken by the rise of sovereign claims over the continental shelf and the rendering of services entirely in a zone virtually beyond the reach of sovereign claims - the cyberspace. Lastly, International Law (of which International Taxation would be a subdivision), whose very existence has always been questioned, is undoubtedly undergoing profound change.
Authorities, statutes and case law have tried to define tax, but their views are never unanimous. F.R. Davies comments on the controversy on this issue:
Geoffrey Morse, David W. Williams, Davies Principles of Tax Law, London: Sweet & Maxwell, 5th ed., 2004, Chapter 1, pages 3 and 4.
Art. 3 of Brazilian Tax Code (Law No. 5.172, of October 25, 1966) also try to grasp the concept:
Available (in Portuguese) at , accessed April 16, 2007.
Our free translation. "Art. 3   Tributo    toda presta    o pecuni  ria compuls  ria, em moeda ou cujo valor nela se possa exprimir, que n  o constitua san    o de ato il  cito, institu  da em lei e cobrada mediante atividade administrativa plenamente vinculada.".
Moreover, article 4 of the aforementioned Brazilian Code states that on making a determination of whether a charge is in the nature of tax, regard must be had to taxable event covered by the norm, instead of both its formal characteristics and the allocation to be given to revenue arising therefrom. This view was shared by both the High Court of Justice Chancery Division (Revenue), in Commissioners of Inland Revenue v. OC Van Der Grinten NV (2000), and the European Court of Justice in Epson Europe BV Case C-375/98 (8th June 2000) as a matter of European Union law. In the former trial, the High Court relied on the latter, holding that: 2000 WL 1675177, referred to by Geoffrey Morse, David W. Williams, op. cit.
See , accessed on April 16, 2007.
It would appear fair to say that taxes are all charges that have the economic effect of such, irrespective of their characterization by the law. In any event, they a crucial tool of the economic policy of a state, being one of the modalities of the genus of public revenue alongside quasi-private prices, public prices, fees and special assessments, according to a traditional classification by Luigi Einaudi. To this Italian scholar, the distinctive feature of tax is the fact that it is not in any way tantamount to consideration charged at taxpayers for services rendered, being, instead, collections intended to making for general expenses that only public entities are able to provide to a community - such as defence and jurisdiction. "Corso di Scienza Della Finanza", Third Edition. xvi + 594 pp., 8vo. Turin : La Reforma S ociale, 1916, reviewed by S. L. B. for Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Vol. 79, No. 4. (Jul., 1916), pp. 531-533, available at , accessed April 16, 2007.
Even though taxation may fulfill other aims not related with raising revenue (the such as redistribution of wealth), it is nevertheless always the practice of an organized state with the aim of providing for costs intrinsic to government, within the larger framework of organization of the public budget.
This might lead us to think that all taxation is, essentially, national, and that there could be no international taxation, as there is no international government. But before we analyze this question, we should consider what enables a country to tax natural or juristic persons.
As early as 1215, when King John granted the Earls and Barons the Magna Carta - whose   2 seem to contains what could be construed as an allusion to the principle of vertical equity as to tax liability - , the jurisdiction as to tax has to face limits under laws with constitutional status, whose contents cannot be departed by subsequent statutes of lower hierarchy. Such limitations could be regarded as expressions of an attempt try to weigh the interests of, on the one hand, the fisc, and, on the other hand, the rights of individuals to the holding of property. This is made ever more convoluted by the fact that tax laws have to be provided for by statutes that must approved precisely by the representatives of those who will must suffer with its enactment - i.e. the citizens. Perhaps that is why Bagehot, in a seminal work, warns that taxation is "(...) so painful that in a sensitive community which has strong organs of expression and action, the maintenance of a great surplus is excessively difficult." "(2) If any earl, baron, or other person that holds lands directly of the Crown, for military service, shall die, and at his death his heir shall be of full age and owe a 'relief', the heir shall have his inheritance on payment of the ancient scale of 'relief'. That is to say, the heir or heirs of an earl shall pay   100 for the entire earl 's barony, the heir or heirs of a knight l00s. at most for the entire knight 's 'fee', and any man that owes less shall pay less, in accordance with the ancient usage of 'fees'." (Available at , accessed on April 17, 2007).
The English Constitution, available at , accessed on April 17, 2007.
Certain limitations to the power of imposition, such as the classic rule "No taxation without representation" and the principle of progressive taxation of income, seem to stem from broader fundamental rights deeply ingrained in the legal consciousness as humankind, having been, for this reason, and provided for in Universal Declaration of Human Rights, such as the right to equal treatment before the law (Art. 7) and the rights of individuals to personal property (Art. 17). Indeed, some less positivist jurists take the view they need not even be enacted to take effect, as they are natural law, embodying fundamental guarantees that can never be breached. In any event, these general principles of law have been inscribed into many Constitutions which, in most cases, can only be amended by a supermajority, if ever. Some examples of these rules are provided for in the table below. "Article 7. All are equal before the law and are entitled without any discrimination to equal protection of the law. All are entitled to equal protection against any discrimination in violation of this Declaration and against any incitement to such discrimination." "Article 17. (1) Everyone has the right to own property alone as well as in association with others. (2) No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his property.".
The answer of the question of this essay should partly be clear by now: the power a country has the right to tax an individual or a company arises from its own people, acting through its representatives in Congress, within the limits of the Constitution.
Moreover, ideally, and even if not expressly provided for by the law, Congressmen, prior and throughout the process of enacting tax legislation, must account for the optimal, most rational way of doing so, namely by setting up a tax system in which the ensemble of taxes - with their different tax bases, rates and taxpayers - does not provides disincentives to production and economic inefficiency. For instance, very high rates on income might spare taxpayers too little money for consumption, as explained in detail in The Meade Report , with an ensuing plunge in aggregate demand and consequent plummeting overall tax revenue for the government and rise in unemployment figures as companies tries to adjust to new, lower levels of production.
Meade Report (1978): The Structure and Reform of Direct Taxation page 8, available at , accessed on April 19, 2007.
We shall now turn to the issue of the possibility of an international taxation.
If taxation is quintessentially the act of a state, how can there be international taxation, if there is no sovereign global state with powers to enact and enforce tax legislation in a worldwide basis, and later apportion the product of this taxation among its sub-units?.
International Law has always had its deniers, who hold that only a true sovereign can validly enact legal commands to its subjects, and as states live under no overarching authority, the obligations they undertake in the international sphere possess a merely moral nature.
Such as John Austin, in The Province of Jurisprudence Determined, at 133 and 201 (Berlin: Hampshire and Wolheim, edn. 1954, originally published in 1832), cited by Jos   E. Alvarez, "The Promise and Perils of International Organizations", from Alvarez, International Organizations as Law-makers (Oxford University Press, 2005), pp. 588-620. 25", in J. Faundez, IEL CORE COURSE, GLOBALIZATION AND THE INTERNATIONAL LEGAL PROCESS - Cases and Materials, 2007.
Albeit this absolute view of sovereignty has become far from unanimous in our days of diminishing state 's exclusive domain, it still holds true that tax jurisdiction is so typically an expression of public policy that and enforcing it abroad is tantamount to impose on other countries the exercise of typical acts of sovereignty within their territory. This seems to be one of the few unanimous views about taxation, as opposed to, for example, service of process - which is regarded as a private act incumbent upon the party to a legal proceeding under common law but as a governmental act in civil law countries.
Even though this is practice is not unknown to state practice, as in the case of issuance of visas by consuls.
It is generally agreed that there is no rule of international law determining that countries should enforce the private laws of another, and they only do so out of comity, absent any convention providing for such. Conversely, as to taxation, the governing principle is that no country shall be required to enforce the revenue laws of another. Countries may even agree to qualify some conducts as crimes under international law (such as genocide), as well as to establish an International Criminal Court to try cases involving these practices (as the one created by the Rome Statute), but the inception of a Universal Court of Tax Appeals is most unlikely. In fact, one thing is to get countries to cooperate with one another on a global scale in the repression of conducts universally regarded as crimes; another, quite different, is to request them to refrain from competing for the limited resources of private wealth available for collection by public treasuries.
Pursuant to the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, available at , accessed April 19, 2007.
See , accessed April 19, 2007.
In fact, we could here paraphrase the traditional Roman dictum and state, Ubi potestas, ibi fiscus _ namely that every sovereign is vested with powers of imposition, which, as seen before, they alone can exercise. In fact, tax jurisdiction looks hardly compatible with globalization, as it is the activity of a state as such, and as opposed to other states, to be carried out solely through traditional positive norms duly enforced by its administration. In fact, the rule of soft law still appears distant from the perspective of our subject. Similarly, it is not surprising that coordination and harmonisation of tax laws have progressed at a far slower pace than many other issues within EU Law, for, comparatively, its member-states may be as reluctant as citizens while considering whether to pass tax laws that impair their financial situation.
Ubi societas, ibi jus.
A classical division of jurisdiction is between prescriptive and enforcement. At least theoretically, as enacting legislation is an expression of sovereignty, all countries could pass prescriptive extraterritorial legislation. As a fact, many actually did, perhaps relying, for this purposes, on the Lotus Case - in which held that the burden of proving that a state has no jurisdiction under international law lies on the State challenging such jurisdiction.
Available at , accessed April 19, 2007.
As summarized by A. Qureishi (The Public International Law of Taxation, Chapter 3, page 22).
In order to better figure out this division, let us pick an extreme example. Let us think of a statute enacted by a little fictitious country which provides for tax claim on the income of all persons, natural or juristic, everywhere in the world. Absurd as it may seem, such a law could at least be enacted validly within the territorial limits of an individual state. It might be argued that such a law would offend against international law - firstly, because states should refrain from exercising jurisdiction over people and things entirely unrelated to it; and secondly, because as rule of customary international law, a country cannot enforce a law that it cannot validly prescribe. Nevertheless, the authorities of this state might invoke the authority of Qureishi and state that there is no general principle of international public law restricting the sovereignty of countries as to taxation apart from extraterritoriality of diplomatic and consular services.
In that respect, ICJ former President Jimenez de Arechaga - cited by A Qureishi, ibid, page 44) while commenting on F. Mann, The Doctrine of International Jurisdiction Revisited after Twenty Years (186 Hague Recueil, 1984) - contends that this is the "loose criterion", rather than a "pure of international law", to provide guidance in such situations.
The Public International Law of Taxation, Chapter 3, page 28.
Obviously, the example of our "anti-tax haven" is most unlikely to happen, as a worldwide revenues arising thereto would be impossible to collect efficiently and reasonably, as they would have to be provided from taxpayers whose identity or abode our imaginary country ignores. Such a statute would also be unfair, as our imaginary nation can provide nothing to persons who never set foot on its territory, let alone elected representatives in its Parliament to pass tax laws. It would in fact violate at least tenets one, four, and nine of the ten preached in Towards a better tax system - Practical consideration of the ten tenets by the Tax Faculty , and would have no bearing on the current international economic and financial practice - as it should, according to The Meade Report . "Tenet One - Statutory: tax legislation should be enacted by statute and subject to proper democratic scrutiny by Parliament." "Tenet Four - Easy to collect and to calculate: a person 's tax liability should be easy to calculate and straightforward and cheap to collect." "Tenet Nine - Fair and reasonable: the revenue authorities have a duty to exercise their powers reasonably.".
Institute of Chartered Accountants for England and Wales, Published May 2000. Reference: Tax Guide 2/00, page 5, available at , accessed on April 19, 2007.
Op. cit., page 19.
In any event, most problems would only arise when our imaginary "island in the rain" tried to enforce its overtly far-reached tax statute abroad - for, until that moment, the content of such an extraordinary decree may be ignored by most of its targets.
Leaving aside any practical considerations, why is this rule so absurd? Chiefly because it attempts at setting up tax liability upon foreigners lacking any connection whatsoever with the country who enacted it.
Having dwelt on the legal grounds underlying the right for countries to tax persons and companies and the reach of this right, we should analyze how individual countries have been dealing with their potentially rival claims on the assets of individuals and countries.
International law has traditionally accorded to every country a right to tax people and companies within its borders and its nationals everywhere, in each case as a manifestation of sovereignty links between a country and his national. It also held by many that as a matter of international customary law, there is a need of a reasonable connection for a tax authority to determine tax liability of a person - i.e. a proper fiscal attachment, which was lacking in the example set above. It might be argued that our fictitious country, recognizing the importance of such link (not only out of its will to abide by international legal standards, but because it would provide a better basis for tax administration), without which his would be merely "an empty gesture of sovereign power", could be tempted to try a different move and attempt at the military conquest of neighbour. In that event, should our daring islet emerge victorious, we would have a problem of International Law - although the adventure might prove economically unjustifiable.
Such as R.J. Martha, The Jurisdiction to Tax in International Law.
A. Qureishi, op. cit., page 47, while commenting on A.R. Albrecht, The Taxation of Aliens Under International Law (1952), pp. 152-169.
Sticking to the plane of international taxation, the most straightforward hypothesis of overlapping tax claims as between states stream from the conflict of jurisdiction between the country of nationality / citizenship of the taxpayer and the country to which he or she may move (i.e. of his domicile / residence / permanent sojourn). The former country may want to impose an unrestricted tax liability upon this person (with grounds of its personal attachment of sovereign power upon him), whilst the latter may engage in same action (although relying on an economic attachment instead of a personal one, as some interests of same individual may be within the limits of its territory). From the point of view of the taxpayer, he would be taxed twice - even though each country would merely be applying its own tax laws, and, according to many scholars, none would be under any obligation to behave otherwise. However, if no country is to give any form of relief, our taxpayer in this example is far more likely to dissipate his assets so as to make for his tax obligations than both his fellow citizens in his native country or his neighbours in his host country - an outcome that neither the country of source (i.e. the state from whose territory income flows abroad) nor the country of income (namely that aiming to tax foreign incomes of its resident) would desire.
As to companies, the same logic applies. If they are to be taxed by both the country where the central management and control / registered office of the holding of the group lies and the countries where it chooses to incorporate branches or a subsidiaries, they will have little incentive to extend their activities beyond the borders of country where the parent company have its registered office, and therefore would be precluded from making profits abroad and return part of this income home in the form of dividends, as well as from taking know-and expertise and creating jobs in possible host countries.
It would then appear to be in best interest of countries desiring to favour the free circulation of people and capital in and out their territories to apportion the taxable income to be generated by this migrant companies and individuals as between themselves, thereby providing some relief to the latter so as not to disincentive them from engaging in cross-border transactions which might inure to the benefit of the Exchequer.
After much argument, the situation is now far more stabilised in the form of the aforementioned bilateral and multilateral treaties inspired by the ones prepared by experts in the form of the OECD and the UN Model Conventions. The most critical issue covered by these Conventions is the conflicts that may arise when multinational companies open a branch or a subsidiary abroad. The way these conventions deal with this is issue is chiefly the rule in article 5, which deals with source / residence conflicts that have a bearing on multinationals. i.e. "Permanent Establishments" in the parlance of the Model Conventions, art. 5.
Superficially all problems might seem to be equated pursuant to that proviso, whereby income generated in the country where the P.E. is based is to be taxed by the source country, who would then provide relief as to the taxation of dividends to overseas shareholders, whilst the country where the head office of the parent is similarly to provide some source of compensation as to the taxation of income earned abroad of a local company. Things, however, have not always been that simple.
Eg. in the form of an exemption.
Such as a tax credit.
Qureishi sets up some two interesting diverging examples: first, could a State tax the profits of the foreign parent company in addition to those of the local subsidiary? The Supreme Court of Pakistan answered in the negative, holding that "it is a rule of international law that a legislature has authority ... to tax foreigners only if they earn or receive income in the country for which that legislature has authority to make laws".
A. Qureishi, op. cit., page 41, while commenting on on F. Mann, The Doctrine of International Jurisdiction in International Law Hague Recueil, 1964-1), Vol. 1, pp. 109-119.
Imperial Tobacco Co. of India v. Commissioners of Income Tax, International L.R. 27, 103 (1958), also referred to by Qureishi, ibid.
But how long does fiscal attachment extends? Indian laws once provided for the taxation of the worldwide income of an American manufacturer of carpets who only bought wool in India, subsequently manufacturing and selling carpets in the US - thus favouring raw material as a element of fiscal attachment over others like financing. Clearly this was the stance of authorities of a developing country, who devised a tax rule that on its face favoured their nation at the expense of its developed counterparts.
As contained in Webb Sons & Co. v. Commissioner of Income Tax, 18, Income Tax Reports 33 (1950), quoted from Katz and Brewer, International Transactions and Relations (1960), p. 719. The example is from Qureishi, ibid. page 43.
A further incentive for countries to cooperate in regulating taxation of cross-border transactions is given by the fact that multinationals might attempt to exploit differences in tax as between jurisdictions, in the practice commonly known as tax shopping, or treaty shopping. As a reaction, most countries passed transfer pricing rules - which tackle this practice by removing artificial business conditions relied upon by sister companies within multinationals corporations.
It may be tempting to state that, as jurisdiction to tax is an expression of public policy - albeit pursued domestically under strict limits provided for by constitutional laws and sound principles of fiscal administration - , a country would be free to tax all individuals and companies within the reach of its sovereignty, without taking into account eventual competing claims of other nations.
In fact, the dense net of international agreements based on the Model Conventions on Income and Capital might suggest the reverse: that there is now a rule of customary international law providing for an obligation for states to engage in negotiations with those other states with whom they have significant interactions for the conclusion of a bilateral treaty in the framework of the Model Conventions, as the abundant evidence of repeated international practice arguably makes article 38, b of the Statute of the International Court of Justice kick in. In much the same manner, Alvarez suggests that the United States had a duty to carry on negotiations related to the Kyoto Protocol, for states have no longer any reason to be left alone if, by doing so, they risk jeopardising a multilateral agreement under the auspices of International Organisations. By the same token, the right of states to remain functioning as tax havens or to preserve absolute bank secrecy could be questioned as this may not only encourage harmful tax competition between states, but also undermine global efforts to curb money laundering. "Article 38. 1. The Court, whose function is to decide in accordance with international law such disputes as are submitted to it, shall apply: (...) b. international custom, as evidence of a general practice accepted as law; " (Available in , accessed April 19, 2007).
Op. cit., p. 602.
In fact, it would be futile to say that countries can choose freely to tax whoever is within the reach of their sovereignty, without consulting with one another, for in the long run this would only worsen harmful tax competition, which would not be in their best interest of any of them. As business intertwine, the policy that best suits countries seem to be attempting to coordinate their tax practices on a worldwide basis ever more, beginning with entering into the highest number of Agreements to prevent Double Taxation. The right of countries to tax may still be thought of as absolute, but countries now have more to gain by joining the web of DT Treaties than by challenging its rules, as fiscal neutrality removes the tax element of investment allocation decisions. The enactment of transfer pricing rules and the pressure on tax havens to adopt practices of transparency clearly indicate the advantages of gathering countries to cooperate to set up rules for their competition for global private resources.
