The impact of depreciation in real exchange on trade balance has been a long standing debate in policy circles. Proponents of the international monetarist approach argue that real devaluation of currency raises the price of traded good relative to non-traded goods leading to fewer imports while, ceteris paribus, exports become more competitive resulting in an overall improvement in trade balance. Proponents of the absorption approach such as (Alexander 1952) argue that "devaluation may change terms of trade, increase production, and switch production from foreign to domestic goods, thus improving the trade balance" (Bahmani-Oskooee 1984). Channels through which devaluation can negatively affect the trade balance are discussed in (Katseli 1983).
Empirical evidence is mixed: (Bahmani-Oskooee 1989) finds the long-term effect of devaluation to be negative in the case of India, Greece, and Korea; and positive in the case of Thailand. The U.S. trade balance deteriorated in 1972 after a devaluation of the dollar in 1971. (Upadgyaya, Dhakal 1997) find that though devaluation improved trade balance for Colombia, Mexico and Thailand, the effect was statistically significant only for Mexico. For Cyprus, Greece and Morocco, devaluation had a statistically significant negative effect on trade balance. (Himarios Jan 1989), in his extensive study, finds a positive effect of devaluation on trade balance in over 80% of the cases studied. He also finds a J-curve for Greece (in contrast to (Bahmani-Oskooee Aug., 1989) ), France, Ecuador and Zambia.
J-curve: Immediately following a devaluation trade balance deteriorates but improves in the long-run. (Krueger 1983) explains short-term deterioration in trade balance as being caused by domination of current account by goods already in transit, existing contracts and the like. (Junz, Rodolf 1973) attribute lagged improved of trade balance in response to devaluation of real exchange rate to five factors - recognition, decision, delivery, replacement and production. Their empirical evidence supports lags of up to five years.
This study focuses on India. India 's closed economy approach precipitated a macroeconomic crisis in 1991 which led a paradigm shift in macro-policies. Pre-1991, India followed a largely socialist approach involving restrictions on industry, international trade, currency movements, financial and banking sector and private enterprise. Growth in the 1980s was fuelled largely by expansionary fiscal policies resulting in a balance of payments crisis in 1991.
Following the crisis, India undertook a complete overhaul of its macroeconomic policies along more liberal and capitalist lines. The economy was opened up, freer trade was allowed, the over-valued exchange rate was allowed to depreciate both in nominal and real terms, policies to improve public finance were implemented, and fetters to the operation of private enterprise were slowly removed. In short, India 's economy faced a radically different set of policies which led to improved economic performance - increased GDP growth rate to over 6%, increased capital formation, higher savings, etc. As a consequence of the change in policies, a priori, a change or shift in trend of trade balance is expected.
In this paper, we shall focus on the long-run relationship between trade and real exchange rate and proceed as follows:
Section II will present the econometric model and data description.
Section III contains the econometric procedures carried out, summary of results, explanation of the process and econometric interpretation of the results were relevant.
Section IV presents the econometric results of Section III in a cohesive fashion and links them to the economic theory discussed in Section I.
Section V discusses the limitations and possible extensions of the model.
Section VI - conclusion.
In econometric modelling, the ideas in (Bahmani-Oskooee 1984) are followed without the monetary flavour of their model. Further, a quadratic trend and a dummy for potential structural break are included in our model to arrive at the following long-run relationships: (1) (2) where is the OLS residual. Our sample includes 155 quarterly observations from 1968Q1 to 2006Q3. The explanatory variables, collected from International Financial Statistics (IMF) and generated trends/dummies, are as follows:
Using the above data, real trade balance [BAL] and real exchange rate [REER] were computed as follows:
Prior to using an estimator, it is important to verify that the relevant assumptions underlying the estimator hold in our model. This section discusses OLS assumptions and the tests used to validate them. In subsequent sections, we will only briefly report the results of these tests to avoid repetition:
Jarque-Bera and Asymptotic Normality: Normally distributed residuals are an important requirement for OLS since, then, estimated co-efficients, being linear combinations of the residuals, are also normally distributed. If the distribution of the estimates is known, hypothesis testing is possible by comparison with the standard normal tables. If the null of normality is rejected, hypothesis testing may not be accurate.
ADP/PP Test and Stationarity : We use ADF/PP to test for order of integration and, proceed to use of cointegration techniques.
Zero Conditional Mean and No Perfect Collinearity: Covariance between explanatory variables and residuals should be zero. Results are not reported in the output, but the covariance matrix, where appropriate, has been checked and no violation of this assumption was found. On checking correlation between explanatory variables, we found no perfect collinearity.
White 's Test and Homoscedasticity: OLS assumes that the variance of the disturbances is constant over time; i.e. homoscedastic. Under heteroscedasticity, OLS estimates are unbiased but not precise due to changing variance of the residuals. Thus, the standard errors used to compute t-statistics may be incorrect leading to invalid t-statistics and therefore incorrect inference of significance and tests of restrictions. White 's test (where the null is Homoscedasticity) is used to detect the presence of heteroscedasticity. We follow the 'no cross terms' form of the test due to sample-size considerations (and compare results with 'cross-terms' form where possible. Whenever heteroscedasticity is detected, we make the use of White 's Heteroscedasticity Consistent Standard Errors (HCSE) which, in the presence of heteroscedasticity of unknown form, give us consistent standard errors (and thus t-statistics) allowing valid tests of restrictions/significance.
Durbin-Watson/Breusch-Godfreyand Serial Correlation: OLS is BLUE under the assumption of 'no serial correlation' in residuals. The Breusch-Godfrey test has the null of no serial correlation and a Durbin-Watson stat around 2.00 indicates no serial correlation.
Weak Dependence: (Wooldridge 2003) defines variable X as weakly dependent if X t and X t+h are 'almost independent' as h increases without bound. This property is verified from the correlograms of REER and BAL.
We use Ramsey RESET where a rejection of the null indicates incorrect functional form, specification error or omitted variables.
Order of integration refers to the number of times a variable has to be differenced to achieve stationarity.
We explore the correlograms, in levels and first difference, of BAL and REER, with 30 lags. Inspection of the correlograms for BAL and REER indicate that both variables suffer from statistically significant auto-correlation in levels. The first differences of both variables show statistically significant absence of auto-correlation as indicated by the p-values. This suggests that both series are not stationary and ergodic.
We test for stationarity (Table I - next page) in our data - REER and BAL - using the Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) and the Phillips-Perron (PP) t-statistics along with MacKinnon 's critical values since standard asymptotic theory does not work. We have used the SIC/AIC criteria for determination of lag length for unit roots. Correlograms and test output presented in Appendices IA and IB. ** Null of unit root rejected at 5% level of significance. All level tests conducted with a trend and intercept. In the case of first difference of variables, only an intercept was included.
Economic theory predicts a long-run relationship (cointegrating relationship) between REER and BAL. We use Engle-Granger Methodology (EGM) which is suitable when one cointegrating relationship is expected.
For use of this technique, the regression equation has to be balanced in the time series property of the variables; i.e., it is required that all variables be integrated to the same order - I(1) in our case. If there exists a cointegrating relationship between the two variables, the residuals obtained from the long-run regression (in levels) will be stationary - I(0).
The t-ratios from the long-run equation are not interpretable, their distribution is not exactly known and the residuals might suffer from serial correlation. However, this is not of concern at this stage. What is important is that the residuals from the regression are stationary.
The OLS estimators in the EGM regression are super-consistent implying that they are not only consistent, but they also converge to populate value at a rate faster than if the variables were stationary.
It is important to note that EGM states nothing about causality. We summarise the estimation results of static equations (1) and (2) in Table II(next page0:
The fitted-actual-residual graphs from both regressions are:
Though equation two 's regression output (Table II) shows that LIB is insignificant, we cannot reject the null hypothesis on econometric grounds since the t-statistics are invalid and hypothesis testing is not possible. Moreover, the residuals from this regression are stationary, i.e. I(0); this is a cointegrating equation. At this point, we find no econometric criterion that provides us with a basis of deciding between the two. However, when we include LIB in the Dynamic General-to-Specific approach model, it can be rejected as insignificant since the estimated regression exhibited valid t-statistics. Thus we proceed further with equation one .
Output not reported owing to space constraint. The PP test- statistic rejects the null of unit root at 5% level of significance.
Apart from being insignificant, in the dynamic general-to-specific model, for the Chow breakpoint test, the F-statistic clearly fails to reject the null of 'no structural break' at 5% while the log-likelihood ratio marginally rejects it at 5% level of significance.
The residuals from equation 1 are checked for stationarity using the PP and ADF tests. An important point to note is that we need to compute the correct MacKinnon critical for our tests values since the regression package assumes that n=1 while in our case n=3 (n is the number of variables). We have clear results (Table III) from both the ADF and the PP tests that our residuals are stationary implying that we have a valid long-run equilibrium relationship (cointegrating relationship). ** tests with intercept, no trend. Null of unit root rejected.
The long-run relationship from Engle-Granger emerges as: (3).
The second step of the Engle-Granger methodology involves the estimation of an Error Correction Model (ECM). It must be noted at the outset that all variables in the ECM are stationary - since we include first differences of I(1) variables and a stationary residual from the static regression. The time trends, being exogenous, need not be included in the ECM. Thus, after running standard diagnostic tests, we can interpret the t-statistics in the ECM.
In consonance with economic theory discussed, our initial ECM includes 12 lags of both the dependent and the independent variable since it is reasonable to expect elasticity of trade balance to real exchange rate to adjust slowly over a horizon of up to 5 years as it involves structural changes, renegotiation of contracts, etc. (Junz, Rodolf May 1973).
We test for heteroscedasticity, normality, serial correlation and omitted variable bias. The results are presented in Table IV (regression output in Appendix III):
White 's test for heteroscedasticity indicated heteroscedasticity of unknown form. Thus, the ECM was re-estimated using White 's Heteroscedasticity Consistent Standard Errors (HCSE).
It is important to verify here that the error correction term (first lag of EQ1RES) is statistically significant between 0 and -1. This has the important implication that each period, the equilibrium error is corrected and the system is not explosive.
We drop the insignificant variables (at 5% level of significance) to arrive at the restricted/parsimonious ECM (Table V - next page): * result from test with no-cross terms. Results do not change with cross-terms (presented in Appendix).
At 5% level of significance, we can infer the following about the restricted and the unrestricted ECM:
In both the restricted and the unrestricted version of the ECM, all the assumptions underlying OLS with time series are satisfied as is evident from the discussion in Section 3.1 and the results of diagnostic tests presented in Tables IV and VI.
We interpret only the restricted ECM. The co-efficient of residual from the static regression ( = -0.3204) is negative as expected. This implies that some equilibrium error at t-1 was removed in period t and that our system will remain in equilibrium and not explode.
In addition, when we tested for Auto-regressive Conditional Heteroscedasticity using the ARCH LM test (results in the respective Appendices), we detected it at 5% levels of significance. This is discussed further in the Limitations and Extensions section of the paper.
In this approach, we model the long-run and the short-run together. Starting from a general ADL model, we arrive at a specific model by imposing restrictions on co-efficients and dropping insignificant ones. After imposition of restrictions, we were left with the model with results presented in Table (IV):
At 5% level of significance, we can infer the following:
The long-run relationship from the Dynamic General-to-Specific approach is calculated as follows: (4).
Our long-run equilibrium relationship from Engle-Granger (EG) and the Dynamic General-to-Specific (G-S) methods is as follows:
The focus of this paper is on the impact of real exchange rate devaluation on trade balance. There is a difference of 3.37 in the coefficient of REER between the two approaches. The coefficients of the trend variables also differ in magnitude. Even though the difference in magnitude exists, it must be kept in mind that they are small in comparison to empirical changes observable in the variables - REER, T, T2 - and do not have a qualitatively negative impact on our study.
Having considered the magnitudes, it is crucial that both methods of arriving at the long-run equilibrium give us the same signs on each variable. This is true of our long-run equilibrium estimates.
Thus, using both approaches, we conclude that an increase in REER causes an increase in BAL (=X-M). This implies that a real depreciation in exchange rate, in the long-run, improves real trade balance in India. This long-run relationship is consistent with a large number of empirical studies on the subject (discussed in Section I).
At each stage of estimation, we detected ARCH (Autoregressive Conditional Heteroscedasticity) effects. Owing to methodological limitations, we could not specify the model to take into account these effects. Furthermore, OLS may no longer be the optimal estimator in the presence of ARCH effects when compared with non-linear estimators such as the maximum likelihood estimator. Further work on the model developed should take ARCH into account.
Though we get economically sensible relationships from both EGM and dynamic General-to-Specific models, we have different values for the intercept and co-efficients of real exchange rate and linear time trend.
Furthermore, owing to constraints on the length of the project, we have focussed only on the long-run equilibrium. It would be interesting exercise to model the short-term dynamics and test for the presence of a 'J-curve'.
A structural break was expected in the model around 1990-91 when India underwent a macroeconomic crisis. Though the dummy used in the model to capture this crisis (LIB) was rejected as insignificant on the basis of valid statistical criterion in Section 3.3., one would expect, guided by economics, the paradigm shift in policy to cause a structural break.
Chow Breakpoint Test and insignificance in the dynamic general-to-specific regression.
We find, in the case of India, that devaluation improves trade balance. Our results contradict those of (Bahmani-Oskooee 1984) who finds that real devaluation worsens the trade balance for India in the long-run. This conflict might be due to the face that we have used co-integration technique for non-stationary variables while (Bahmani-Oskooee 1984), being an old study, makes no use cointegration.
The results of this study lend themselves to policy prescriptions suggesting devaluation as a measure to improve trade balance. One must, however, approach the result with caution. Even though devaluation might improve the trade balance, it is important for a developing country like India to analyse its trade baskets and the impact devaluation would have on it. Such an analysis is important before devaluation is used as a policy tool since it could have negative long-run effects on growth if it adversely affects basic industrial inputs and causes other perverse distortions in the basic input-output matrix. Therefore, a detailed study of the components of the basket of traded goods is recommended if devaluation is pursued as a policy tool.
