Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans) has been used as one of the favourite model organisms for developmental studies. Embryogenesis of C. elegans extensively relies on maternal effect genes for intrinsically asymmetric cell division and cell-cell interactions. In this review, the early embryogenesis of C. elegans, from the establishment of Anterior-Posterior polarity initiated by sperm entry to the asymmetrical cell divisions and different cell lineages induced by a variety of cell fate determinant is summarized, some of the molecular mechanisms carried out by the crucial maternally expressed cell fate determinants underling these processes are described.
Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans) is a small (~1mm long) free living soil nematode that has a predominantly hermaphroditic adult life. (Figure 1).
The life cycle of C. elegans contains an embryonic stage, four larval stages (L1-L4) and an adult stage. (Figure 2) Molt (apolysis, new cuticle formation, and ecdysis) takes place at the end of each larval stage. Under certain external conditions such as starvation, a non-growing stage, dauer larva, may form through a facultative, reversible, arrest at the lethargus in the second of four cuticle molts. The life cycle is about 2 to 3 weeks. Each adult produce approximately 300 to 350 offspring under self-fertilization and more if it mates with males.
Since the research of C. elegans lead by Sydney Brenner in 1974 [2], C. elegans has been extensively used as one of the model organisms (Figure 3) due to the advantages: a rapid period of embryogenesis (~ 16hr), which could be carried out in a Petri dish, temperature dependent short life cycle, small number (959) of somatic cells with few and highly invariant cell lineage [2] [3], a workable genetics, a transparent cuticle, the self-fertilization system, which allows isolation and stock of recessive mutants on all chromosomes[4], as well as the temperature dependent growth rate. (Table 1) The entire genome of C. elegans has been sequenced [5], and many mutants affecting cellular differentiation, behaviour and morphology have been characterized so far [4] [6] [7] [8].
Genetic analyses of early pattern formation include forward genetics and reverse genetics. Forward genetics often utilizes embryos from maternal-effect-lethal-bearing mothers (mutant embryos) of an egg-laying defective mother. [11] [6] Screening of specific embryonic terminal arrest phenotypes can be done through the mother 's transparent cuticle using a compound microscope. [7] [12] Ablate particular cells by laser or remove cells through a puncture in the eggshell [13] [14] to create partial embryos can be used to assist the analysis.
Reverse genetics such as targeted deletion via transposon insertion or standard mutagen [15] and RNA interference (injection of RNA transcript into the syncytial gonad of wild-type worms to prevent the production of protein from the target gene) [16] outshines the traditional forward genetics since the completion of C. elegans' genome sequencing.
The fertilized zygote (P 0) of C. elegans under goes a series of fixed symmetrical divisions assisted by a variety of cell-cell interactions and regulating proteins, which largely rely on maternal effect genes. (Figure 4) Each division produces one somatic founder cell and one stem cell, which undergoes meridional division to produce another anterior daughter cell and a posterior stem cell. In total, six "founder" cells (AB, MS, E, C, D, P 4) with distinct developmental fates are produced. [3] Most early embryonic patterning events are completed at the 28-cell stage, by which time all three body axes are established. Later, gastrulation completion, continued proliferation, cell differentiation, programmed cell deaths, and morphogenesis take place. [17].
During fertilization in C. elegans, the sperm not only triggers the production of the impermeable eggshell and the completion of oocyte meiosis I and II, but also play a crucial role in establishing the A-P polarity of the zygote (Figure 5). The sperm pronucleus moves to the nearest end of the oblong oocyte and defines it as the future posterior pole. [18] Pronucleus/centrosome complex (SPCC) of the sperm is crucial for initiating the A-P axis establishment by inducing polarized changes in both cytoplasm and cortex (during pseudocleavage). .
The A-P polarity initiation requires sperm donated centrosomes and associated astral microtubules (MTs) [19], but the sperm pronucleus and its chromatin mass are not necessary [20]. Maturation of functional centrosomes requires maternal spd-2 gene. As spd-2 mutants have delayed and attenuated formation of sperm asters, which resulted in the random localization of cortical PAR-2, and absence of asymmetric cortical contractions, asymmetrical distribution of PAR-3, and P granule localization, the importance of MTs for A-P axis specification is demonstrated. [21] The interactions between the sperm donated centrosomes and the microfilament-rich cortex is assisted by the anaphase promoting complex (APC). Displacement of the mitotic spindle during anaphase requires additional factors down stream of PAR proteins assisting the microtubules. (Figure 6).
Despite of the involvement of some PAR proteins (Figure 7) in A-P polarity establishing, which proved by the partial cytoplasmic streaming defects of par-2 and par-3 mutants [22], the major functions of these maternally expressed factors during embryogenesis are their role in maintaining the polarity, hence assist the asymmetrical division, cell specification and morphogenesis.
Examining par mutants [17] helped to uncover the major interactions of PAR proteins within their localization pathway (Figure 8), and also showed the intracellular signalling roles of PAR proteins are defined by their sequence motifs. Studies shows, "upstream" PAR-5 is required for as asymmetric distribution of cortical PAR-1, PAR-2, PAR-3, and PAR-6. Parentheses of PAR-3 and PAR-6 mutually required both proteins, and also dependent on PAR-2. PAR-3 and PAR-6 are also required to restrict PAR-2 to the posterior. PAR-1 is "downstream", as it affected by all other par mutants.
Many other maternally expressed factors are also involved in the A-P polarity maintenance and cell lineage determination, such as MES-1, MEX-1, MEX-3, SKN-1, PIE-1, GLP-1, APX-1, PAL-1, etc. [17] (Figure 9) MES-1 affects the polarity in P 2 and P 3 blastomeres, due to its role in spindle orientation and P granule and PIE-1 location. [8] MEX-3 has roles in control the translation in AB blastomeres and suppresses expression of muscle cell fate, partially by blocking PAL-1. [27] MEX-3 is also concentrated in P granules, mex-3 mutation shown late defect in P granule and causing germline fate of D. [28] mex-1 mutation, can cause improper location of P granule, SKN-1 and PIE-1, as well as causing fate alteration in multiple lineages. Asymmetrical distributions of these determinants assist the establishment of cytoplasmic asymmetries during the first few cell divisions. Functions of some of these factors are described later in this essay.
In C. elegans, the abilities to produce pharynx (compose a muscular and glandular organ used in feeding) are owned by the descendents of ABa and EMS. In addition, EMS descendents also have the ability to produce intestine (Figure 10).
The skn-1 gene maps between genes fern-l and uric-44 of chromosome IV. There are four alleles of skn-1 found in previous study: skn-1 (zu67), skn-1 (zu129), R skn-1 (zu135), skn-1 (zu138), with skn-1 (zu67) being the strongest allele. [7] Transcription factor SKN-1 binds distinctly through a basic region (BR), which resembles a basic leucine-zipper (bZIP) proteins, to target DNA as a monomer. (Figure 10).
SKN-1 presenting in the early blastomeres is maternally expressed, which was confirmed by experimental findings: 99.5% positive SKN-1 staining, rather than 75%, was obtained in 2- and 4-cell stage of self-progenies from skn-1 (zu67)/+ heterozygous mother. [7] This also supported by the findings that wild-type male could not rescue embryos from homozygous skn-1 mutant mother, and viable progeny could be produced by heterozygous skn-1/+ mother with homozygous skn-1 mutant males. SKN-1 activates in pharynx induction of the AB and EMS lineage, as well as intestine generation in EMS descendents (E) by different mechanisms. (Figure 11).
The posterior pharynx and intestinal cell production from EMS descendents (SM and E) involve unequal distribution of morphogenetic factors in an autonomous manner. This supported by findings: when all other blastomeres (at 4-cell stage) were killed by a laser microbeam, EMS descendents could still carry out the production of pharyngeal and intestinal cells. [7] SKN-1 is one of the morphogenetic factors involved in determining of these cells' fates.
A high level of SKN-1 is required for inducing pharyngeal cells from MS. In early stages (2-cell, 4-cell, and 8-cell stages) P 1 and its descendents accumulate a higher level of SKN-1 than AB and its descendents. SKN-1 is no longer detectable in both lineages after 12-cell stage. The lower level of SKN-1 in AB leaves only the P 1 descendents the potential to produce pharynx intrinsically. This is partially due to the restriction of SKN-1 to the P 1 by MEX-1. [31] The potential is further located only into EMS, rather than P 2 due to the inhibition of SKN-1 in P 2 by PIE-1. PAR-1 also plays a regulation role in the spatial distribution of factors, such as PIE-1, which determines the different fates of EMS and P 2. mex-1 and par-1 mutants resulted in higher SKN-1 level in AB, which acquire a skn-1 dependent intrinsic ability to produce pharynx. [32] [31] While pie-1 mutants resulted in P 2 to adopted a MS-like fate, but have no effect on SKN-1 level. This indicates pie-1 may play a direct role in specification the fate of EMS and P 2, rather than a general role, like what performs by par-1, in regulating the special distribution of fate determining factors.
In addition to the pharyngeal cell production, EMS descendent (E) also produces intestinal cells, induced by early interaction between P 2 and EMS through a signal transduction from MOM-2 (Wnt-like protein) on P 2 to MOM-5 (Frizzled-like receptor) on surface of EMS. [2] (Figure 12) This gives raise to the intestinal cell precursor E in the next division. Intestinal cell formation is also assisted by SKN-1, skn-1 mutant produce no birefringent gut granules - characteristic of intestinal cells [33], as well as have defects in later gastrulation, due to the abnormal division of Ea and Ep prior their migration into the interior embryo. The penetrance for intestinal, as well as pharyngeal phenotype, in skn-1 mutant is temperature dependent - the lower the temperature, the higher the penetrance. [7].
Anterior pharyngeal cell generation in ABa descendents is induced by cell-cell contact with descendants of EMS (MS), in a SKN-1-dependent process that require plg-1. [13] This is supported by the findings: when EMS is either destroyed or removed, ABa is unable to produce pharyngeal cell, and in plg-1 mutant pharynx can only be partially produced from EMS descendents. [6] In skn-1 mutants, ABa descendents finally may give rise to hypodermal cells, suggested by the observation that division numbers and nuclear morphology in these cells resemble to ABa derived anterior hypodermis. [7].
In C. elegans, germline development is located to posterior germline blastomeres (P 1, P 2, P 3, P 4) during each asymmetrical division. (Figure 13) These cells contain maternally loaded P granules, which contain proteins implicated in RNA binding. The ability to determine germline fate is mainly possessed by two genes: pie-1 and mex-1. pie-1 encodes a 38kDa nuclear predominant protein with a two C 3H class zinc fingers. (Figure 14) In germline blastomeres, PIE-1 induces germline fate mainly by regulating two mechanisms: somatic gene silencing in nuclei and stability and expression regulating of maternal RNAs in cytoplasm, which are consistent with its location in nuclei and cytoplasm of the germline cells.
During C. elegans embryogenesis, synthesis new mRNAs is detected in somatic nuclei from the 4-cell stage. In germline blastomeres, one of the suggested mechanisms for the transcription silencing of these mRNAs is through PIE-1. The repression domain of PIE-1 that may carries out this "silencing", however, is located outside the zinc finger region, and within the carboxy-terminal one-third of the protein. Transcription silencing possibly through a process regulating a specific phosphoepitope - the phosphorylation on second Serine on YSPTSPS repeats of RNA polymerase II (short for RNAPII-H5, as monoclonal antibodies like H5 recognize this phosphoserine). As phosphorylation on the second Serine of this YSPTSPS RNAPII CTD repeat in mammalian cells takes place during the initiation phase and elongation phase of transcription [35] so as a large increasing in RNAPII-H5 appears during global gene expression for stress response in yeast [36], a close relationship between this specific phosphoepitope and gene transcription is indicated. (Figure 15).
PIE-1 contains a YAPMAPT domain, resembles the YSPTSPS on RNAP-II (Figure 16), which may act to target a CTD-binding complex, possibly a CTD kinase, in order to prevent the appearance of RNAPII-H5. [34] This transcriptional silencing by PIE-1 in the nuclei of germ-line blastomeres can allow the blocking of maternally encoded transcription factors from activating zygotic genes ( e.g. maternal SKN-1 activate zygotic med-1), as well as assists in preventing maternal RNAs degradation in germ-line blastomeres. [38].
This is consistent with the fact, in germline blastomeres, RNAPII-H5 first appears in somatic nuclei in the 4-cell stages with the companioned onset of transcription, but remain absence in germline blastomeres where PIE-1 accumulates. While, when PIE-1 disappears from the Z2 and Z3, RNAPII-H5 appears in these germline cells so as transcription begins.
In addition to transcription silencing in nucleus, PIE-1 present in cytoplasm perform a role in promoting the expression of maternally encoded factors, such as NOS-2, which involves in the localization of primordial germ cells in embryonic development. [38] cytoplasmic PIE-1 binds to P granule through its second finger (ZF2) [39] This cytoplasmic PIE-1 activities can be separated genetically from its transcription silencing ability as findings [38] shown RNA interference of RNAPII can not rescue all pie-1 mutant phenotype such as the wild type NOS-2 protein levels in primordial germ cells; as well as mutant (ZF2 mutant) which PIE-1 lost its ability to promote NOS-2 expression can still perform transcription silencing.
Both functions of somatic gene silencing in nuclei and stability and expression regulating of maternal RNAs in cytoplasm assist in preserve the germ cell fate. (Figure 17).
In germline blastomeres of early embryos MEX-1, present in cytoplasm, share a common "finger" motif with PIE-1 (Figure 18), and both binds to P granules. It acts to restrict the PIE-1 functions to the germline blastomeres in early embryogenesis. The original low level of MEX-1 in oocyte increases significantly after fertilization. Shortly after each asymmetrical division, MEX-1 can be detected in both daughter cells, but anterior MEX-1 is soon degraded and left only the posterior germline blastomeres accumulated with MEX-1.
MEX-1 is crucial for the proper segregation of the P granules in embryonic blastomeres. In mex-1 mutants, P granule remain dispersed, as a result large proportion remain in the anterior lager daughter cells during each successive symmetrical division. As mentioned earlier, MEX-1 is required for PIE-1 positioning, which in turn assists transcription silencing. mex-1 mutants cause aberration in the specification of all lineages including germline. [41] Like the par genes, mex-1 is also involved in establishing the initial polarity of the embryo.
Post-division degradation (Figure 19) of mistakenly segregated posterior CCCH finger proteins (e.g. PIE-1, MEX-1, POS-1) are targeted by ZIF-1 through an ubiquitin-mediated targeting process for proteosome-mediated degradation in anterior daughter cells. This helps to further regulate the germ cell specification and asymmetric cytoplasmic distributions of the determinants.
Four Notch pathways are involved in C. elegans during embryogenesis. (Figure 20) The first two, which are described here, are mediated extensively by maternally-expressed GLP-1/Notch, the other two require LIN-12/Notch (and less GLP-1/Notch).
The first Notch system at 4-cell stage (Figure 22, see the end of this section) is activated through a signal transduction from an APX-1/Delta located on P 2 to a GLP-1/Notch present on Abp blastomere. Though Aba and Abp are interchangeable and both contain GLP-1 initially, only Abp is in direct contact with P 2, thus ABp is induced to adopt a different fate (from ABa) - dorsal-most blastomere.
GLP-1 translation from the maternal glp-1 mRNAs is regulated temporally in oocytes and one-cell stage embryos through binding of an RNP-type RNA-binding protein, SPN-4, to a 125-base temporal control region (TCR) located at the 3' end of the 3' UTR. Translation of GLP-1 is also regulated spatially by suppressing translation in the posterior blastomeres through the binding of a CCCH zinc-finger protein, POS-1, to a 66-base spatial control region (SCR) located in the middle of the UTR. [44] (Figure 21) APX-1 is also regulated by the maternal gene product POS-1, which contain two TIS11-type CCCH zinc motifs and present as a temporary P granules component in the cytoplasm of the posterior blastomeres, as pos-1 mutants shown failure in expressing APX-1 protein from maternally provided apx-1 mRNA. [45].
In the second Notch system at 12-cell stage (Figure 22), MS provides a signal that influences the development of neighbouring ABa descendants. SKN-1, rather than APX-1, transfer this signal from MS blastomere to maternally-expressed GLP-1/Notch remains on ABa descendants (ABala, ABalp, ABara, ABarp). This is supported by the finding that no APX-1 protein is detected in the MS blastomere. [46].
The third and fourth Notch pathways are briefly summarized in Figure 22, which includes the all four Notch pathway in the early embryogenesis of C. elegans.
Embryogenesis in C. elegans is extensively regulated by maternal effect genes from the initial A-P polarity establishment to the lateral asymmetrical cell divisions and cell fate determination. Embryogenesis employs a variety of intrinsic factors as well as intercellular signaling pathways, such as the PAR proteins for the initial axis set up and maintaining, SKN-1 for the inducing of the pharynx and intestine cell fate, PIE-1 and MEX-1 involved in determining somatic and germline lineage. As well as the Notch pathway mediated by GLP-1 in AB descendents. All of these distinct, while interrelated, processes that are crucial for the correct development of the C. elegans sharing a same feature - they rely significantly on maternally expressed cell-fate determinants.
