In George Orwell 's essay Politics and the English Language he describes his concern for the state of the English language and sees politics as a key reason for its decline. He discusses how political language is invented in order to separate its meaning from its declaration. He claims political language "is designed to make lies sound truthful and murder respectable, and to give an appearance of solidity to pure wind." The dictators of the twentieth century carried out such atrocities that it was fundamental that they were able to downplay their actions when justifying their behaviour. Use of euphemism was common as words such as "pacification", "transfer of population" and "elimination of unreliable elements" were given to explain military practice that governments did not want people to imagine. In Orwell 's writing he studies how language is power. An oppressive state seeks to abolish liberty, freedom and individuality and the most effective way of doing this is through the control of language. As accurate history is fundamental to liberty and language dictates history, one can destroy liberty through the control of language. Orwell was interested in how much more effective it is to alter a persons thinking in accordance with yours than to simply force them to comply by using force. Orwell noticed how much through the perversion, manipulation and distortion of language, power could be attained and executed in a society.
Animal Farm (1945) is Orwell 's satire on how absolute power corrupts. Orwell said that his moment of epiphany was when in Spain he saw a young boy hitting a carthorse with a stick, the horse 's lack of knowledge rendered it a servant as it did not realise its own power. Power is not simply attained by force, but by knowledge and the oppression of others. In the novel, power is established through speech, which is the overflow of knowledge, which is gained through education. This cycle is carried out by the pigs, which are the cleverest of the animals. They have the ability to read and write and therefore they have access to power. The old Major is the first animal to show this. He invents and prophesies the animal rebellion, writes the seven commandments and teaches the animals the pro-animal revolutionary song 'Beasts of England'. This is the first time a non-human has exorcised power and the other animals revere him. His commandments are written up on the wall, and this clarification and representation of language is treated as absolute truth, for the other animals cannot write. The song comes to represent a collective consciousness for the animals as it becomes entwined in their identities, creating a sense of powerful togetherness. They sing it frequently to celebrate their rebellion as it represents their freedom, liberty and triumph.
After the overthrow of human leadership of the farm, the pigs, especially Snowball and Napoleon, lead the animals together. Snowball is educated, using his findings from a book on Julius Caesar to help the animals win the Battle of the Cowshed. He is also a great speaker, often gaining majority support through his impressive speeches. The other animals are so taken in by the powerful language that in a debate between Snowball and Napoleon they "always found themselves in agreement with the one who was speaking at the moment." (34) Napoleon realises Snowball 's power and he sees his inability to match it. He initially tries to stop it by teaching the sheep to bleat during Snowball 's speeches. Yet this method only works momentarily and Napoleon concludes that the only way to defeat him is to use violence.
As the dictatorship emerges on the farm the majority of the animals are left completely helpless, for they have no educated language and therefore no expression. When they witness Napoleon 's cruelty towards Snowball "several of them would have protested if they could have found the right arguments." (36) Instead, they must step back and watch, as they fear the brute force of the bloodthirsty dogs. Under Napoleon 's headship there is no longer education for animals that are not pigs and they become na  ve victims of the manipulative educated, unable to articulate their queries or express their thoughts. The individuals lose their sense of self as they are scared of rebelling against what is the rebellion and therefore they feel it must be the life that they rebelled in order to have. Even the limited language that they do have is used against them, Boxer 's maxims of "I will work harder" and "Comrade Napoleon is always right" (84) are his expressed, 'true' sayings that guide his life and seek to explain all problems. Yet his ultimate truth is perverted and oppressive, and not surprisingly approved by the pigs. The demonstrations and processions provide the animals with an opportunity to believe that they are free and can express themselves, yet this is strictly under the guidance of the pigs. The pigs also allow Moses, the raven, to tell the animals of his journeys to Sugarcandy Mountain, but again this false image of utopia allows them to believe in freedom and happiness and encourages them to work in the light of a better, even if intangible, future.
Although Napoleon is not a specially gifted speaker he has the young pig Squealer to talk for him. Squealer talks extremely manipulatively and powerfully. His first duty is to rationally explain the pig 's extra food as necessary to their learning and an essential factor to Jones not returning. Fear is an important part of Squealer 's early propaganda and it is so effective because the animals see language as transparent, innocently believing everything he says to be true. Perhaps Squealer 's most powerful coup is his recreation of history to fit with Napoleon 's present aims. Established or written history represents memory, which represents truth. So through Squealer 's manipulation and mastery of language he has the ability to recreate the past that leads to his control of the animal 's memories and the party 's unchallenged control of truth. Squealer is able to rewrite the history of events that the animals were even part of themselves, "Now when Squealer described the scene so graphically, it seemed to the animals that they did remember it." (54) As memory is based on truth, and truth can be known through language, the animals are convinced that Squealers knowledge of language is so far superior to theirs that when he says Snowball was a traitor they believe it must be so. Such is the power of language that the animal 's memories of the past can even be changed in the present.
The animals have no proof of their convictions other than what they are told by Squealer. He refers to 'documents' and 'fresh documents' (78) that he has as proof for any of his revelations; unfortunately for the animals their reading abilities are too inferior to understand them, so again they are left to trust him. The written word bears extra power in a similar way to the old Major 's written commandments and these are continually changed and adapted as the pigs become more and more human. The explanation for the changes to the commandments is given as the animal 's poor memories as their past values and beliefs fade away into oblivion. Language has power over memory and the animals simply "could not remember...they had nothing to go on except Squealer 's lists of figures." (87) The animals become collectively reliant on the pigs and lose their sense of selves. The pigs simply continue to remind them of the past, which was far worse, their present freedom and their triumphant and caring leader Napoleon.
Orwell 's final warning to the world is described in his last novel Nineteen Eighty-Four, published in 1949, a year before he died. NEF seems to be some steps further on from Animal Farm as the novel begins with Winston, the main protagonist, living in forceful dictatorship, controlled by the imposing figure of Big Brother. The party has complete control over society 's language, thoughts and minds. There are huge posters everywhere showing the image of a face, with the caption, "BIG BROTHER IS WATCHING YOU." (3) These aggressive unequivocal posters are a constant reminder to the people that indeed, they are being watched. The party is in command. The party has expressed its clear power in such a way that the inhabitants of Oceania must live in fear. In conjunction with this are the numerous telescreens, microphones, the patrol police and perhaps most fear-worthy, the thought police, those that can read an individual 's most inner thoughts. The party are pro-active in their propaganda; the telescreens transmit information such as increased production figures, military success and general news leading to the glorification of the party, which creates a feeling of collective national pride and prosperity. The party 's three conclusive slogans are also inscribed on posters, "WAR IS PEACE, FREEDOM IS SLAVERY, IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH." (6) These absolute truths convey the party 's complete wisdom and knowledge as the written language expresses power, force and clarity.
Another key form of propaganda used by the party are the Two Minutes Hate sessions where party members are given the chance to show their hatred effusively towards a screen showing the image of the leader of the enemy, Emmanuel Goldstein. This inimical demonstration represents a chance for individuals to feel a sense of rebellion, power and importance through expression and speech, yet ultimately the party strictly controls it. The sessions represent the only time that party members have to verbalize themselves independently, but in reality its primary use is for the party to see those who are not conforming.
Winston is alienated in this society, for he is desperately fighting against the party by trying to hold on to his own sense of self. His chief form of individual power is writing in his diary, an activity strictly prohibited by the party. This activity represents Winston 's opportunity of power and expression. He wants to mark truth and influence the future as he writes to " a time when truth exists." (30) Winston 's writings originally seem to be rather indistinguishable and confused, a " stream of rubbish" (11) that are seemingly only strands of disordered and irrelevant memory from a damaged and inactive mind. Yet, as he begins to revive his brain, the activity stimulates and clarifies other memory, that of his meetings with O'Brien and Julia. I think this demonstrates even on a small level the power of language. As Winston writes, his memory flourishes. The consequence of this is to activate a sense of subjectivity, which erupts inside Winston and causes him to feel indignance towards the oppressive party. He writes several times "DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER." (20) It seems that revelation and consciousness are the consequences of mind expansion through language and therefore it is clear why it is so important for the party to forbid individual 's own expression.
Due to the party 's control of language and therefore history, Winston finds it impossible to discover any accurate account of the past. Winston 's own memory of the past is confused and indistinguishable. However hard he tries, he concludes, "he could not remember." (5) The party promote modern life as simply improved from the past, yet nobody has any tangible evidence of it. Winston seeks to remember and piece together a rhyme about the London churches, which starts "'Oranges and Lemons,' say the bells of St. Clement 's."(101) It becomes extremely important for him as it represents a small fragment of the past in the present, and the truth of life before Big Brother. As he learns more and more of the rhyme, he is discovering history and unveiling hope. Yet the rhyme concludes with the line, "Here comes a candle to light you to bed, here comes a chopper to chop off your head!" (231) Significantly this line is spoken as Winston and Julia are caught and surrounded by the police. This symbolises that the wish for knowledge, language, memory, history and power leads to destruction. For the dictatorship demand all individuals to project all their energy into the party and its collective future. Therefore anyone searching for anything else contrary to the party 's teachings will be killed. As the glass paperweight is smashed against the floor, Winston 's own consciousness is broken forever.
Perhaps the party 's greatest invention is 'Newspeak', the official language of Oceania. It uses shorter words than Standard English seeking to arouse minimum echoes in the speaker 's mind. Any subjective memory of the past will fade away in Newspeak, because the language bears almost no relation, or reflection to the past. The vocabulary is cold, apathetic and detached. The language is controlled by the ideological values of the party, as language comes before thought, the party seeks to control the minds of the people. Rebellion will therefore become impossible, as it will become inconceivable. As Syme says, "In the end we shall make thoughtcrime literally impossible, because there will be no words in which to express it." (55) Newspeak destroys previous words, narrowing the range of thought and by destroying heretical words it renders heresy unfeasible. The party 's power is intrinsically caught up with Newspeak. "The revolution will be complete when the language is perfect. Newspeak is Ignsoc and Ingsoc is Newspeak." (55) The target is that by 2050 newspeak will be the only language known in Oceania. Every individual will become unavoidably part of the state, destroying any possible sense of self.
The dictatorships of the time of Orwell 's writing were Hitler 's Germany and Stalin 's Soviet Russia. These dictatorships used extreme violence and assassination to gain power and conformity. Yet Big Brother 's party is a step further on. Winston perceives that "If the party could thrust its hand into the past and say of this or that event, 'it never happened'-that surely was more terrifying than mere torture and death." (37) The processes of this power are through the control of human minds, carried out by changing the past, and 'doublethink', the term used to describe one holding two contradictory truths together at one time, believing that whatever is the latest truth becomes the present truth, regardless of the past. This involves conquering ones own memory. O'Brien explains to Winston the party 's lust for power over humanity, "Power is in tearing human minds to pieces and putting them together again in new shapes of your own choosing." (279) Winston cannot be killed until he becomes completely humiliated, emaciated and helpless and most importantly, not until he loves Big Brother. The dictatorships of the past killed rebellious victims, but Big Brother 's party demand conformity, and this everlasting power 's weapon is language. Clearly force is essential to the complete turn around of rebellious individuals in 1984, but through Newspeak, the intention is that by 2050 all minds will be controlled by the party. This is the desired everlasting power, the boot stamping on the human face.
Does this leave the individual with any hope? The individual seeks power to the extent that he is willing to give up his own identity for it, such as O'Brien, Charrington or Squealor. Winston suggests that the power lies in the proles, but is this simply a wishful hope or could this be possible? Orwell was a Socialist, and always believed in the power of the proletariat, yet became increasingly disillusioned with their ignorance. In NEF, the proles, who represent a massive part of the population, are not even monitored, but are fed with trivial activities, such as the lottery and pornography, to keep their weak minds fulfilled and ignorant to the idea of a better life. Winston is fascinated by the large lady 's voice, her song seems to represent freedom, expression and perhaps hope. Yet, I think ultimately it is powerless because her voice is unconscious and oblivious. The individual has no power because the individual has no language. For the party control the people 's consciousnesses as the party control language, as Syme concludes, "Orthodoxy is unconsciousness." (56).
