August Bebel stated in his works that 'there can be no emancipation of humanity without the social independence and equality of the sexes'. This prediction suggests that there is a distinction between the two sexes or, in relation to social categories, between gender and their associated gender roles. 'A biological given sex (i.e., maleness or femaleness) is used as the basis for constructing a social category that we call gender (i.e., masculinity or femininity)." By means of this definition and the definition of gender roles as 'a set of behavioural requirements [...] that are prescribed for a society 's members depending on their sex', this essay will analyse how The Good Soldier by Ford Madox Ford and Mrs Dalloway by Virginia Woolf explore the construction of gender and gender roles.
German socialist, 1840-1913.
August Bebel, 'Woman under Socialism, 1904', in Modernism: An Anthology of Sources and Documents, edited by Vassiliki Kolocotronial. (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1998), p.62.
Claire Renzetti, Daniel Curran, Women, Men, and Society, 2nd ed. (Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1992), p.2.
Ibid., p.4.
Furthermore it will examine whether these books offer two different perceptions of this topic, since The Good Soldier was written by a man around the beginning of the First World War whereas Mrs Dalloway was written by a woman after the war. Naturally, one may assume that they construct gender and gender roles in different ways. Although this can be analysed according to their use of language, this essay will mainly focus on the images and themes used in the novels, such as the women 's suffrage movement, homosexuality, marriage, professional status and education, as well as the presentation of different main male and female characters, with whom the construction of gender and gender roles is explored.
Both novels offer interesting male and female characters who clearly construct their gender and associated gender roles through their behaviour towards each other and the role they play in society. The Good Soldier presents two couples, the Americans John and Florence Dowell, and their English friends, Edward and Leonora Ashburnham. By means of his depiction of the main characters, Ford gives an insight into his understanding of gender at the beginning of the twentieth century, which may be related to his personal experiences, especially to that of marriage.
His representation of gender is not conventional with regard to Leonora 's and, even more so, Florence 's personalities. Neither of the women show a characteristic obedience to their husbands. With their marriages, in Leonora 's case one arranged by her parents, they gained a certain position in society and therefore achieved an independence of sorts. For example, when her husband has affairs with other women, Leonora also takes a lover. She even organised Maisie Maidan 's trip from India to their residence in Bad Nauheim where she 'wanted [her] for an adulteress' for her husband. Florence Dowell, as the second main female character, 'takes numerous lovers behind her locked door', in particular Edward Ashburnham and Jimmy. This open demonstration of women having affairs as men do seems to be a striking understanding of their gender. These women can do the same things as men. for a description of the arrangements between the two families see Ford Madox Ford, The Good Soldier, edited by Thomas C. Moser (Oxford: Oxford World 's Classics, 1999), pp.160-163.
Ibid., p.86.
Sara Haslam, Fragmenting Modernism: Ford Madox Ford, the Novel and the Great War (Manchester:
Manchester University Press, 2002), p.56.
Edward 'believed in the virtue, tenderness and moral support of women', but he has to find out that the gender roles have changed and that women may also suppress men. Leonora, who is renowned for 'her coldness' and, perhaps more markedly, Nancy Rufford 'desired to see Edward suffer [and] gave him hell'. According to Ford, cited in Haslam, Edward Ashburnham represents 'the polygamous desires that underlie all men'. Taking this statement by the author into consideration, one may assume that it is normal for men to have extra-marital affairs and that this is therefore one role related to this sex. Furthermore, being strong may also been seen as a part of this role, whereas Edward.
Ford Madox Ford, The Good Soldier, edited by Thomas C. Moser (Oxford: Oxford World 's Classics, 1999), p.188.
Ibid., p.71.
Ibid., p.274.
Sara Haslam, Fragmenting Modernism: Ford Madox Ford, the Novel and the Great War (Manchester:
Manchester University Press, 2002), p.54.
Anthony Fowles, Ford Madox Ford: The Principal Fiction (London: Greenwich Exchange, 2002), p.54.
On the one hand, he is rather weak - a stereotypically feminine trait - which can be seen when he is destroyed by women and finally commits suicide. On the other hand however, he represents typical roles associated with masculinity - he is 'an excellent magistrate, a first rate soldier, [and] one of the best landlords'.
Ford Madox Ford, The Good Soldier, edited by Thomas C. Moser (Oxford: Oxford World 's Classics, 1999), p.15.
The character of John Dowell is, in relation to gender and gender roles, interesting. John assumes that Edward 'regarded [him] not so much as a man [, but that he] had to be regarded as a woman or a solicitor'. The Good Soldier therefore offers a new perception of gender where the roles of man and woman might have been changed. According to Weininger 's text Sex and Character cited in Haslam, Ford provides 'examples of differently mixed proportions of masculinity and femininity: all four protagonists manifest a singular [...] combination' in the novel.
Ibid., pp.34-35.
Sara Haslam, Fragmenting Modernism: Ford Madox Ford, the Novel and the Great War (Manchester:
Manchester University Press, 2002), p.55.
Virginia Woolf 's novel Mrs Dalloway.
Rachel Bowlby, ed. Virginia Woolf (London: Longman, 1992), p.12.
Clarissa Dalloway is the most interesting character in this book. Her walk through London, from which she has to retreat into her bedroom 'feeling [...] shrivelled, [and] aged', reveals a vulnerable and weak personality. Not knowing if she has made the right decisions in the past, she thereby also confesses difficulties with her gender identity. Her marriage is not really happy, although she can always put her trust in her husband 's loyalty towards her. According to Virginia Woolf, cited in Bradbury, 'all human relations have shifted - those between [...] husbands and wives, parents and children'. Although the relationship between Clarissa and her husband seems quite traditional, with the important exception of her homosexual feelings towards other women, this change in gender roles becomes obvious in her relationship with her daughter Elizabeth. Whereas Clarissa is undertaking the 'traditionally feminine project of giving a party [and thereby] constructing social harmony', her daughter reveals, by thinking about her future, that they stand for two different times with changed perceptions of gender.
Virginia Woolf, Mrs Dalloway, edited by David Bradshaw (Oxford: Oxford World 's Classics, 2000), p.26.
Malcolm Bradbury, The Social Context of Modern English Literature ( Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1971), p.85.
Elizabeth Abel, 'Narrative Structure(s) and Female Development: the Case of Mrs Dalloway' in.
Virginia Woolf, edited by Rachel Bowlby (London: Longman, 1992), p.80.
In contrast to Clarissa Dalloway, Lady Bruton 'is split between the masculine and feminine world' by 'being more interested in politics than people [and by] talking like a man'. She even accuses other women, and especially Clarissa, of getting 'in their husbands' way' and thereby preventing them from fulfilling their role in society. Richard Dalloway and Hugh Whitbread represent typical male roles and characters. The only things that Mrs Dalloway tells the reader about them is that they work for the public and support their wives. Richard Dalloway once shows some sentimental feelings towards his wife when he brings to mind 'that it was a miracle that he should have married' her. Whereas Richard wants to express his feelings by saying "I love you", which he is ultimately unable to do; 'male authority, partially incarnate in the relentless chiming of Big Ben, is more ominously embodied in the Doctors Holmes and Bradshaw'.
Fran  oise Defromont, 'Mirrors and Fragments' in Virginia Woolf, edited by Rachel Bowlby (London: Longman, 1992), p.65.
Virginia Woolf, Mrs Dalloway, edited by David Bradshaw (Oxford: Oxford World 's Classics, 2000), p.89.
Ibid., p.90.
Ibid., p.98.
Elizabeth Abel, 'Narrative Structure(s) and Female Development: the Case of Mrs Dalloway' in.
Virginia Woolf, edited by Rachel Bowlby (London: Longman, 1992), p.94.
Peter Walsh, with 'the manners and breeding of an English gentleman', adds another layer to this gender. His walk through London leads him to the centres of power, which are linked with masculinity, and therefore gives him an aura of strength. During this gendered walk he even starts stalking a young woman which gives him the feeling of being 'an adventurer [...], a romantic buccaneer'. His role in life is characterised by his love for women, and especially by his love for Clarissa Dalloway, who says that 'he was a man. But not the sort of man one had to respect'. In contrast to the other male characters who represent strength and power, attributes which are generally associated with this gender, Septimus Warren Smith embodies a weak one. Parallels between the personality of Clarissa and Septimus intensify this effect. Once Septimus was a typical male, who 'was one of the first to volunteer' for the First World War. This 'developed [his] manliness', but it finally destroyed him. Therefore a change in his character can be recognized after the war. The Great War not only had an effect on him, but also on society as a whole. As an aftermath of the war, the perception of gender and gender roles changed, as Virginia Woolf 'indicates [in Mrs Dalloway] the masculine tenor of postwar society. The youngest generation in this novel is almost, and boastfully, male'.
Virginia Woolf, Mrs Dalloway, edited by David Bradshaw (Oxford: Oxford World 's Classics, 2000), p.6.
Ibid., pp.45-46.
Ibid., p.133.
Ibid., p.73.
Virginia Woolf, Mrs Dalloway, edited by David Bradshaw (Oxford: Oxford World 's Classics, 2000), p.73.
Elizabeth Abel, 'Narrative Structure(s) and Female Development: the Case of Mrs Dalloway' in.
Virginia Woolf, edited by Rachel Bowlby (London: Longman, 1992), p.94.
As Bebel predicted in 1904, the 'education [of the woman of the future] is the same as that of man [in which] she chooses her occupation on such field as corresponds with her wishes [...] and natural abilities'. This alternation of generations becomes obvious in Mrs Dalloway, since Clarissa Dalloway has no profession and only received a 'few twigs of knowledge [from] Fr  ulein Daniels', whereas her daughter assumes that  'she might be a doctor [or that] she might be a farmer' and therefore will 'play some active role in masculine society'. In this statement made by Elizabeth, Virginia Woolf reveals that a change in the understanding of gender and gender roles had taken place towards more social and intellectual liberty. The new generation has possibilities that were out of reach for the older generation.
August Bebel, 'Woman under Socialism, 1904', in Modernism: An Anthology of Sources and Documents, edited by Vassiliki Kolocotronial. (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1998), p.62.
Virginia Woolf, Mrs Dalloway, edited by David Bradshaw (Oxford: Oxford World 's Classics, 2000), p.7.
Ibid., p.115.
Elizabeth Abel, 'Narrative Structure(s) and Female Development: the Case of Mrs Dalloway' in.
Virginia Woolf, edited by Rachel Bowlby (London: Longman, 1992), p.96.
All of the main female characters in both Mrs Dalloway and The Good Soldier have no professions. They hold parties, travel, enjoy their lives and support their husbands, with the exception of poor Miss Kilman in Mrs Dalloway who has to work hard for her living, teaching history to Elizabeth. In contrast to the other rather rich female characters, such as Clarissa Dalloway, who is described as a woman that 'did nothing, believed nothing', Miss Kilman, as a poor woman, seems to be the only one who has a 'degree' and is therefore 'frightfully clever'. This accentuation of one gender with no profession and education, in contrast to Miss Kilman and the new generation, which is made obvious in Mrs Dalloway, can be explained by Virginia Woolf 's own experience of being disadvantaged by 'not being formally educated, as her brothers had been as a matter of course'. All of the men in Mrs Dalloway have, or in the case of Peter Walsh, have had a profession which assured them of some success and status in society.
Virginia Woolf, Mrs Dalloway, edited by David Bradshaw (Oxford: Oxford World 's Classics, 2000), p.106.
Ibid., p.112.
Ibid., p.111.
Mich  le Barrett, Virginia Woolf: Women and Writing (London: The Women 's Press, 1979), p.7.
In literature about The Good Soldier all 'protagonists [,regardless of being male or female,] are [generally described as] not clever' and 'essentially uncultured'. Whereas the gender role related to one 's profession and the education of men in Mrs Dalloway is mainly a role intended to support a family, a wife or the country, this is not clear in The Good Soldier. This may be due to the fact that the book, in general, describes the relationship between two married couples with no connection to the outside world and that both couples are quite 'wealthy', especially John Dowell. Concerning gender and profession The Good Soldier is remarkable. Although the reader is generally kept in the dark about the education of the main protagonists, only knowing that Edward Ashburnham is a former captain by profession, which is typically male, the female characters seem to be better educated than the male. This is a rather new portrayal, since men are normally regarded as the better educated sex. Leonora is described 'as being remarkably well educated', whilst Florence is 'engaged in educating Captain Ashburnham'. However, during the novel neither of the four protagonists has an actual job and therefore constructs a specific gender role.
Anthony Fowles, Ford Madox Ford: The Principal Fiction (London: Greenwich Exchange, 2002), p.50.
Ibid., p.50.
Ford Madox Ford, The Good Soldier, edited by Thomas C. Moser (Oxford: Oxford World 's Classics, 1999), p.94.
Ford Madox Ford, The Good Soldier, edited by Thomas C. Moser (Oxford: Oxford World 's Classics, 1999), p.47.
Ibid., p.47.
Speaking generally, the gender roles in the books vary greatly, since they offer a different perspective on society. Whereas The Good Soldier is associated more with private life, Mrs Dalloway constructs different gender roles by comparing private life with public social life as well as contrasting two generations. Elizabeth 's dream about a future profession goes together with 'a change of some sort [that] had undoubtedly taken place' in the perception of gender which is pointed out by Peter Walsh when he remarks, after coming back from India, that the new generation of women is wearing make-up and enjoying their time and that they 'would marry when it suit[s]' them.
Virginia Woolf, Mrs Dalloway, edited by David Bradshaw (Oxford: Oxford World 's Classics, 2000), p.61.
Ibid., p.61.
Although the women 's suffrage movement is only mentioned in Mrs Dalloway and not in The Good Soldier, it plays an important role in constructing gender and gender roles. Bebel specified women 'as the sex that [...] has been oppressed, and ruled, and defiled by man [and explained that they therefore have an interest] in removing such a state of things'. He expressed this idea in 1904, at the beginning of the twentieth century, a time of intense suffragette activities. As a result of this movement and the work of Sylvia Pankhurst, by the year '1918 all married women over thirty who were on the local government electoral register were granted to vote'. 'Legislation in favour of women 's rights continued throughout the 1920s and 1930s [and achieved that] all women over twenty one were allowed to vote [by 1928]'.
August Bebel, 'Woman under Socialism, 1904', in Modernism: An Anthology of Sources and Documents, edited by Vassiliki Kolocotronial. (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1998), p.61.
Jane Dowson, Women, Modernism and British Poetry, 1910-1939: Resisting Femininity (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2002), p.14.
Jane Dowson, Women, Modernism and British Poetry, 1910-1939: Resisting Femininity (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2002), p.14.
Although the women in Mrs Dalloway are not really oppressed or ruled by men, they reveal a dependency of sorts on their husbands or upon men in general. The disadvantages of the female sex provoked Sally Seton 's denouncement of Hugh as having 'represented all that was most detestable in British middle-class life [and that] she considered him responsible for the state of those poor girls in Piccadilly'. The distinction between gender led to this argument about women 's rights, during which she explicitly stated 'that women should have votes'. The occurrence of this women 's suffrage movement theme can be explained with reference to Virginia Woolf 's biography. Woolf herself joined the movement in 1910. With the use of this theme, the existing differences between gender during that time are highlighted. The movement fought for a change in the restricted gender roles of women and the consequential results were 'changes in law [which] were both causes and effects of altered ideas about domestic gender roles'. according to David Bradshaw 's Explanatory Notes this refers to the prostitutes of Piccadilly Circus.
Virginia Woolf, Mrs Dalloway, edited by David Bradshaw (Oxford: Oxford World 's Classics, 2000), p.62.
Ibid., p.154.
Ibid., p.viii.
Jane Dowson, Women, Modernism and British Poetry, 1910-1939: Resisting Femininity (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2002), p.14.
Aspects of homosexuality appear in Mrs Dalloway as well as in The Good Soldier in which they construct a certain perception of gender. However, this theme is again stronger in Virginia Woolf than it is in Ford Madox Ford, due to the fact that 'Virginia 's preference for her own sex had been a fact of her life since childhood'. Her own relationships with women had an effect on her life and her writing. In her books the 'life-stories of women and the friendships between them are always set against the limitations of heterosexual and marital relationships'. In Mrs Dalloway these homoerotic tendencies occur in the characters of Clarissa Dalloway, Miss Kilman and Septimus Warren Smith.
Hermione Lee, Virginia Woolf (London: Vintage, 1997), p.490.
Hermione Lee, Virginia Woolf (London: Vintage, 1997), p.491.
Clarissa definitely admired Sally Seton and the reader may have the impression that she would have had a real relationship with her, instead of marrying Richard, if homosexuality had not been illegal at that time. 'This question of love [...], this falling in love with women. [...] Had not that, after all, been love?" Clarissa is not sure about her feelings towards women, and especially towards Sally, since she knows that loving a woman is not what is been expected of her - to marry a man and to fulfil her role as a wife is. However, she confesses that  'she could not take her eyes off Sally'. Being kissed by Sally increased her confusion about her feelings even more. In addition to Clarissa, a second female character of Mrs Dalloway shows rudimentary homosexual traits. For Miss Kilman, Elizabeth is  'so beautiful! [that] she genuinely loved' her. She wishes that  'she could grasp her, [...] could clasp her, [and] could make her hers absolutely and for ever and then die'. This is not as explicit as the kiss between Clarissa and Sally Seton, but it reveals that two women in Mrs Dalloway see their gender differently.
Virginia Woolf, Mrs Dalloway, edited by David Bradshaw (Oxford: Oxford World 's Classics, 2000), p.28.
Ibid., p.28.
Ibid., p.30.
Ibid., p.111.
Ibid., p.112.
A third protagonist, Septimus Warren Smith, highlights homosexual feelings between two men in the book. Septimus 's past as a soldier and his occupation as a clerk reveal traditional gender roles as well as his feelings for Evans, the officer who had shown him 'affection', show an unusual understanding of masculinity. In his lively dreams about the dead Evans, connections to Greek words and songs are made. According to Linda Dowling, cited in Bradshaw 's introduction to Mrs Dalloway, 'the love that dare not speak its name could be spoken of [...] as paiderastia, Greek love' before homosexuality was legalised. This term Greek love was used by authors such as Oscar Wilde 'as a code for homosexuality'.
Ibid., p.73. see for example p. 21, 59, 79 in Virginia Woolf, Mrs Dalloway, edited by David Bradshaw (Oxford:
Oxford World 's Classics, 2000).
Ibid., p.xxxvii.
Ibid., p.xxxvii.
One might also infer a 'homosexual element' in The Good Soldier in the character of John Dowell. Throughout the book, Dowell 's narration reveals how much he adores Edward Ashburnham for what he has done for other people and society. He describes him as 'a fellow that many men liked', but in particular he himself. 'I like him so much - so infinitely much." For John Dowell, Edward Ashburnham is the perfect representation of masculinity, a  'straight, upright and honourable' man. Whereas Dowell at the beginning and throughout The Good Soldier only confesses that he likes Edward, he finally declares that 'I ca n't conceal from myself the fact that I loved Edward Ashburnham'. Although the reader cannot really find any evidence of more than a strong friendship between Dowell and Ashburnham in The Good Soldier, there is a homoerotic element to John Dowell 's thoughts about, and admiration for, Edward Ashburnham. With this introduction of homosexuality to the texts, both authors reveal that gender is not easy to define and that the traditional roles and the understanding of gender may be in a state of change.
Anthony Fowles, Ford Madox Ford: The Principal Fiction (London: Greenwich Exchange, 2002), p.56.
Ford Madox Ford, The Good Soldier, edited by Thomas C. Moser (Oxford: Oxford World 's Classics, 1999), p.73.
Ibid., p.109.
Ibid., p.134.
Ibid., p.291.
After analysing The Good Soldier and Mrs Dalloway insofar as their perception of male and female characters is concerned, one can conclude that they construct gender as well as certain gender roles. As this essay has pointed out, the way of doing this is different in Virginia Woolf 's work to that of Ford Madox Ford 's novel. The images and themes used by the authors vary or appear at a different level of intensity. Of course, the authors are referring to their own experiences concerning gender and gender roles. Therefore, the fact that one book was written by a man, whereas the other one was written by a woman may have had an influence. Where Ford offers a rather negative perception of women, who were the cause of Edward 's destruction, Woolf portrays women in conflict with society. As the war demanded certain gender roles, the perception of gender might also have changed in Mrs Dalloway in contrast to The Good Soldier, a book which was written beforehand. Although The Good Soldier pushes acceptable public boundaries, the presentation of gender and gender roles is more obvious and definitely stronger in Mrs Dalloway. However, since 'the modern period is a period of profound and marked changes in the social structure and in the psychic structures of men', both authors use certain descriptions of love, affairs, relationships and married life as well as generation differences in order to construct their ideas of gender. Beside the main characters, the minor ones, such as Nancy Rufford, as well as other characters in Mrs Dalloway and The Good Soldier, offer interesting perceptions and in general also contribute to the construction of gender and gender roles, but due to limitations of space they could only be briefly mentioned.
Malcolm Bradbury, The Social Context of Modern English Literature (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1971), p.30.
