Oscar Wilde described this absurd quote as a philosophy, and to some extent it is a philosophy by which much of his literature exists. He raises this simple ploy to an almost ludicrous level in the construction of his social comedies. In so doing he parodies high society, portraying it as obsessed with trivia, to such an extent that it can no longer recognise the serious things in life. Wilde uses the idea to discuss not only major issues such as love and religion but also the topical ones of his time.
In some ways the theme of trivialising the serious and vice versa can be attributed to the decadence of the period, which so fascinated Wilde. His works encapsulate many features of the movement, such as perversity, which was considered to be an element of the fin-de-siecle. This is apparent in numerous paradoxical statements and the manner in which characters are so fickle, constantly changing their minds over issues as serious as marriage. He satirizes men by demonstrating that they can be as perverse as women. The egoism associated with decadence contributes to the comedy with absurd confusions in priorities, such as the importance of the name 'Ernest' in a suitor rather than love. It is also apparent in such characters as Dorian and Algy from The Importance of Being Earnest, who consider themselves to be above morality. Another feature is artificiality, which trivialises 'friendships' in society. This provides much of the humour in The Importance of Being Earnest, which is meant to be a comedy of manners. As Cecily says, everyone has a "shallow mask of manner" which is donned and removed according to necessity. It exposes everyone as being guilty of dishonesty and falseness - vices which were considered essential for advancement in society. Gwendolen claims, "In matters of grave importance, style; not sincerity, is the vital thing", and in The Picture of Dorian Gray, society "feels instinctively that manners are of more importance than morals". The rapid switching of truths and lies, earnestness and duplicity exemplify how muddled Victorian values of honesty and responsibility had become.
Many of the topics spoken of lightly in The Importance of Being Ernest were the subject of earnest debate at the time. This included marriage, theology, education, and the agricultural depression. When Gwendolen says that the country bores her, Cecily replies "This is what the newspapers call agricultural depression, is it not? I believe the aristocracy are suffering from it very much just at the present". By trivializing these issues, Wilde distances himself from earnest culture and theatre, whilst creating an original comedy.
One of the key things that Wilde always seems to insist on trivialising is love and marriage. He uses his plays to expose the way in which marriage is used as a manipulative tool to advance a person 's financial and societal stance. He is clear that love and marriage are two very different things. In The Importance of Being Earnest, love is inconsequential to Lady Bracknell, as Wilde uses her to satirize the rituals and attitudes present in Victorian society. For her, birth right and wealth are far more important than love when it comes to making a good match. Much comedy is provided in the discussion between her and Jack as she assesses his suitability as a husband for Gwendolen. It results in Lady Bracknell exclaiming "You can hardly imagine that I and Lord Bracknell would dream of allowing our only daughter....to marry into a cloak-room, and form an alliance with a parcel". The idea of it as a business transaction is exacerbated by comments from characters throughout the play. Miss Prism claims that most unmarried people "live entirely for pleasure". When Jack says he has come to town to propose, Algy replies "I thought you had come up for pleasure?... I call that business". The happy idea of engagement is made into a serious business as it is considered that men should practice proposing to lots of girls before making a real commitment, and Cecily claims that theirs "would hardly have been a really serious engagement if it had n't been broken off at least once". Once a couple is married there is still cynicism, producing such comments as "Three is company, two is none" and "Divorces are made in heaven". The younger ones do have some idea of love, but trivialise it with requirements such as their betrothed must have the name 'Ernest'. The proof of the ridiculousness of their relationships is in the way massive dishonesty is so easily forgiven and resolved. In The Picture of Dorian Gray, Dorian also trivialises love through his fleeting relationship with Sybil. He is simply in love with love and wants a love story rather than reality. By 'falling in love' with an actress he gets to enjoy many different types of women, but none of them are real. He is so full of vanity and selfishness that he is only capable of loving himself. When Sybil commits suicide, even death is trivialised as it is seen as a perfect tragic ending. Henry trivialises love in marriage by cheating and appearing unbothered when his wife eventually leaves him, only conceding that he had been quite "fond of her". It is the same case in A Woman of No Importance, as it is considered surprising when a couple actually gets on well with each other. There are some examples of people understanding true love, but they are usually marginalized or dismissed for being dull characters. Examples of this include Mrs Arbuthnot who knows what the true requirements for marriage should be - love and trust- rather than it being a 'business' deal, and perhaps also the love between Miss Prism and Chasuble.
In some ways Wilde turns religion into a triviality. There is little mention of God from most of the main characters. They are full of selfishness and greed, and there are obviously a great number of unholy events within the texts, such as murder and infidelity. In A Picture of Dorian Gray, Henry and his philosophies on life are taken very seriously, even though he is often described as the devil in disguise. Chasuble is ridiculed in The Importance of Being Earnest and christenings are requested without any thought for their religious purpose, they are even considered to be a heroic act by the fianc  es. There is a modernist sense of disillusionment amongst the characters, as Dorian says "life can be very disappointing". However, possibly as a relic from the staunchly religious days there is a definite sense of moral consequence for Dorian. The one character who truly takes religion seriously is Mrs Arbuthnot in A Woman of No Importance, but she makes it appear dull and even turns it into a selfish act by using it as a form of escape from her misery. The Puritan that preaches moral behaviour is considered to be a novelty and not really taken seriously by society. The disregard for religion could explain much of the triviality in the lives of he characters, as they are all living without any sense of direction or purpose.
In an initial reading it could easily be assumed that The Importance of Being Earnest is devoid of any sober content and that to find a serious meaning would be impossible. However, a large part of the play 's meaning lies in its lack of seriousness. According to Christopher Nasser in Into the Demon Universe, the target of fun is n't just Victorian society, but all of Wilde 's work up until that point. The two most prominent words in the play are 'nonsense' and  'serious' (or their synonyms), which are appropriate as the play can be described as a reduction of all seriousness to the level of nonsense. It can also be described as a self-parody as he laughs at every serious thought he has ever presented and implies that it is all ridiculously harmless by destroying the intellectual content. By identifying this very original idea we can read a far deeper meaning from the play, resulting in its transcendence above the apparently frothy content. In writing a 'trivial comedy for serious people', he is actually trivialising all the ideas he had presented in previous works. In this sense the play is a private joke, but it is appealing to the audience through Wilde 's ability to translate it into public terms.
Many of Wilde 's plays are based on earlier works, but The Importance of Being Earnest is different in that it addresses elements of nearly all of them. He was a Socialist and in 1891 wrote The Soul Of Man Under Socialism. Here, he insisted that a healthy material base and equality of opportunity for all was necessary in order to form a liberal democratic society. He advocated the abolition of private property and attempted to gain the support of the aristocracy by saying "property not only has duties, but has so many duties that its possession to any large extent is a bore". A discussion about property between two characters in the play results in Lady Bracknell claiming that "land has ceased to be either a profit or a pleasure", as it "gives one position, and prevents one from keeping it up". Wilde had thought that the poverty of the lower classes poisoned the lives of the rich, but he easily rejects this idea in the play. The dismissal is exemplified as Algy says "if the lower classes do n't set us a good example, what on earth is the use of them? They seem, as a class, to have absolutely no sense of moral responsibility". However, he is n't really being serious, and none of the characters are particularly bothered about the existence of the lower classes. Wilde sends up the aristocracy 's wealth by implying that none of them actually have any money, and live most of their lives in debt. Algy talks of being "more than usually hard up" and hints at the unpaid tabs when Lane cannot buy cucumbers, even for "ready money". Even worse, Jack is nearly arrested when he is unable to pay a vast restaurant bill. Wilde has trivialized his ideological ideas through the characters total lack of interest in such matters.
Nasser points out that the idea of determinism is heavily considered in The Picture of Dorian Gray, but in The Importance of Being Earnest the serious idea of whether or not man can control his future seems trivial. Algy discovered that his future did n't wait for him to bring it about, but actually occurred without him as Cecily decided upon their engagement months before he had even met her. Rather than feeling uncomfortable with this, he is perfectly happy to join in her fantasy, supposedly acting it out for the rest of his life. Wilde also cleverly addresses the issue of determinism through the structure of the play, advancing the comedy as he does so. An example of this is in a conversation between Jack and Algy, as one says "Cecily and Gwendolen are perfectly certain to be extremely great friends" and the reply is "Women only do that after they've called each other a lot of other things first". In this case a discussion in the first act predicts the outcome in the second.
Should Dorian Gray 's secret double life have been discovered then it would have been considered shocking and no doubt have led to social ruin. This story is massively trivialised as Jack and Algy do n't suffer any consequences from the exposure of their own double lives. For both of them, their true self is their wicked self, as the facades drop when they go 'Bunberrying'. When they are eventually found out there is no punishment, instead they are actually rewarded as they get what they want - marriage. The fianc  s are able to consider the deceit endearing and the men revel in it. Indeed, Algy had already dismissed any opinion on the severity of his actions, claiming "I love scrapes. They are the only things that are never serious" and that "The truth is rarely pure and never simple. Modern life would be very tedious if it were either, and modern literature a complete impossibility!". Jack even complains that "it is a terrible thing for a man to find out suddenly that all his life he has been speaking nothing but the truth", and the audience is made to laugh at the scene even more when he turns to Gwendolen and asks "can you forgive me?. Wilde is able to dismiss the moral tragedy of Dorian with total ease, therefore reducing him to a farce.
Wilde wrote De Profundis in 1905, and in it he claimed to have had summed up "all existence in an epigram". A prominent idea in The Picture of Dorian Gray is that epigrams and paradoxes have the power to corrupt. The Importance of Being Earnest trivialises this as it is crammed full with piquant epigrams, yet they can be separated from the narrative, so leaving little effect on the lives of the characters. It is famed for its hilarious nonsense, provided by all members of the cast. The wit is n't always completely harmless as there is potential for corruption in such phrases as "Divorces are made in heaven". If Henry had said that to Dorian then there could have been damaging results, but Jack and Algy are able to remain unaffected. Wilde trivialises the comic superiority of Henry with the idea that wit exists merely because it is perfectly phrased. When Algy uses one of Henry 's epigrams - "All women become like their mothers. That is their tragedy. No man does. That 's his", in effect he dismisses it by saying "It is perfectly phrased! And quite as true as any observation in life should be". Wilde also trivialises the serious danger of Henry. He is meant to be the meddling devil but is replaced by Lady Bracknell, who is described as a "gorgon". By the end of the play her interfering proves to be harmless.
The insatiable hunger in Salome that ended so dramatically is also dismissed as nonsense. Wilde portrays greed as a trivial vice as Algy scoffs food again and again, turning it into a farce by eating all of Lady Bracknell 's cucumber sandwiches and squabbling over muffins. Jack runs up the massive restaurant bill and yet still neither of them suffer any consequences.
A Woman of No Importance is ridiculed for its immense sentimentality when Jack confuses Miss Prism for his mother. Behind the emotional extremes in the play there were undertones of incest and this was trivialised in the embrace between them as it has amusing sexual overtones. As well as satirizing his own works, Wilde may also be poking fun at the highly emotive traditional Victorian novels that were based on complicated, turbulent and highly moral tales. The Importance of Being Earnest offered a lighter kind of entertainment. This ridicule can be recognised in the dramatically earnest language used by the characters, often in conjunction with paradoxes such as "If you are not too long, I will wait for you all my life".
As well as using The Importance of Being Earnest to satirize society and his own work, Wilde implements it as a tool to hit back at his critics. Some people said that his works were pieces of frothy nonsense and nothing more, which anyone could write. He mocks them when Jack attempts some literary criticism, and Algy retorts "You should leave that to people who have n't been to university. They do it so well in the daily papers!".
Miss Prism is created in response to the hypocritical critics that called it an immoral play. She is a pious woman intent on morality and improvement, especially in literature. She frequently claims earnest yet ridiculous things, such as the study of German grammar being an "intellectual pleasure". However, she eagerly throws all that away without any consideration in order to be with Chasuble. By doing this Wilde shows how trivial he thinks the  'serious' critics are.
All this exemplifies the way in which Oscar Wilde made full and creative use of his idea that "We should treat all the trivial things in life very seriously and all the serious things of life with sincere and studied triviality". It strikes me as ironic that Wilde 's work is taken so seriously by English Literature students today, studiously slaving over his deliberate trivialising of important issues, while critics of the day trivialised the importance of his contribution to literature. Clearly he wanted his trivialising to be taken seriously, rather than his seriousness trivialised.
