Peter Barry writes that the 'essence' of structuralism 'is the belief that things cannot be understood in isolation - they have to be seen in the context of the larger structures they are part of'. The body of text surrounding the extract and its genre must, then, be considered. The monologue takes place in Act Five scene two of what might be regarded as one of Shakespeare 's most powerful tragedies.
Peter Barry Beginning Theory An Introduction to Literary and Cultural Theory 2nd ed (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2002) p. 39.
Roland Barthes 's 'method of understanding' involves the employment of five codes. 'The symbolic code', 'consists of contrasts and pairings related to the most basic binary polarities'. The selected extract is structured around a set of these binary opposites, which, when syntagmatically combined create a deep sense of emotional torment within the tragic hero. In preparing himself to kill his wife, Othello uses many images of life such as, 'rose' (5.2.13); 'vital growth' (5.2.14); 'Balmy breath' (5.2.16). These are surrounded by words and images of death: 'wither' (5.2.15) and 'monumental alabaster' (5.2.5). This demonstrates conflict within the character himself. Also very poignant are the contrasting images of warmth and cold. Phrases such as 'Promethean heat' (5.2.12) and 'flaming minister' create a sense of heat and passion, whilst the candle suggests warmth and life. However, the use of 'alabaster' (5.2.5) as a comparison suggests something cold and dead. There are oppositions of colour; between dark and light which evoke issues perhaps to do with race and symbolically enhance other polarities within the monologue. This opposition within the character Othello is  'summed up', in the oxymoronic lines:
Peter Barry Beginning Theory An Introduction to Literary and Cultural Theory 2nd ed (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2002) p. 51 'Heavenly' is the opposite of what weeping and sorrow should be; 'Othello believes he is acting out of love." Reviewing the structure of the text in such a way, unveils the inner character of the protagonist.
Rebecca Warren York Notes Advanced Othello (London: Pearson Education Limited, 1998) p. 50.
By looking at the extract alone there are aspects of language which can be observed and used to create meaning on a basic level. Like much of Shakespeare 's work, the monologue is written in iambic pentameter. This encourages a rhythm which emphasises significant words, thus evoking both mood and meaning. The syntax used within the lines also aids this. In the first line, for instance, the repeated word 'cause' is given natural emphasis from its place within the rhythmic pattern. Moreover, the caesurae within the line suggest that the speaker (Othello) is in some kind of confused torment; the syntax used gives emphasis on the 'is' in the second part of the line. A structuralist reading of these lines suggests justification. However, since this 'cause' is not identified within the monologue itself, a complete understanding cannot be achieved without the context of the play.
The work of Claude L  vi - Strauss on the structure of the myth recognised that although there was no  'separate and inherent meaning', the text [the parole] could 'be understood by considering its position in the whole cycle (the langue)...' Othello is a tragedy in genre, and Othello the tragic hero. Thus, like the myth, the play can be understood in terms of its genre. By understanding Shakespearean tragedy it is possible to identify 'the cause' without the context of the play, as one of three things, as identified by Aristotle: revenge, ambition or de casibus. The following lines confirm that it is the first that is driving Othello. The tragic hero must embody certain attributes in order to make him tragic. The most poignant of these is the tragic flaw, or folly, which takes hold of the protagonist. Othello 's folly is jealousy and by taking into account the play 's genre it is possible to grasp a basic understanding of the nature of the play. However, a structuralist reading on this level is limited and more detailed observations need to be made.
Peter Barry Beginning Theory An Introduction to Literary and Cultural Theory 2nd ed (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2002) p. 46.
Taking into account both the surrounding text and the genre of the play, these first lines can be read in different ways. Throughout the second half of the play Othello refers to justice. The repetition of the phrase, 'It is the cause' (5.2.1), could be a reaffirmation of the reason behind his intentions. A structuralist reading, which takes into account the binary structure might suggest that Othello is still protesting with himself. The way in which he refuses to name the cause (5.2.2) suggests that the tragic hero cannot accept the thought of being separated from Desdemona by killing her.
Rebecca Warren York Notes Advanced Othello (London: Pearson Education Limited, 1998) p. 49.
Structuralism looks at texts as a  'structured set of signs which carries cultural meanings." Barthes 's third code, 'The cultural code' 'contains references out beyond the text...which evokes a pre-existing image in the reader 's mind'. Within the passage are various signs to suggest meaning. Othello addressing his soul at the end of the first line is commonly found in the Bible and in many classic literary works. In the context of the play, this might suggest that Othello regards the murder of his wife as something sacrificial and divine, not simply an act of revenge. Indeed, later in the scene he confirms this when addressing Desdemona: "...what I intend to do / A murder, which I thought a sacrifice." Taking a structuralist view of the text as part of a larger cultural body reveals more about Shakespeare 's protagonist.
Peter Barry Beginning Theory An Introduction to Literary and Cultural Theory 2nd ed (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2002) p. 47.
Peter Barry Beginning Theory An Introduction to Literary and Cultural Theory 2nd ed (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2002) p. 51.
W. Shakespeare Othello / edited by A. J. Honigmann 3rd ed (Croatia: The Arden Shakespeare, 2001) p. 305.
W. Shakespeare Othello / edited by John O'Connor (China: Pearson Education Limited, 2003) p. 216.
Barthes 's fourth code is 'The semic code', 'also called the connotative code', which is 'linked to theme' and 'constitutes a character'. This line of structuralism, taking into consideration the abundant binary polarities within the passage can generate clear meaning. However, when in line three, Othello expresses a desire not to  'shed her blood' this reading does not give one solid singular meaning, but evokes varying meanings. It is possible to read that the tragic hero is trying to avoid later guilt for his actions and thus does not want to leave behind him evidence of the murder. Some critics, however, have argued that it is a sign that he wishes her to remain as she is; perhaps even wanting her to live. Indeed, in the following line he speaks in admiration of her skin, which is whiter than snow, and later in the monologue reinforces this love when he requests Desdemona to: 'Be thus when thou art dead, and I will kill thee, / And love thee after.' (5.2.18-19).
Peter Barry Beginning Theory An Introduction to Literary and Cultural Theory 2nd ed (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2002) p. 51.
Rebecca Warren York Notes Advanced Othello (London: Pearson Education Limited, 1998) p. 50.
In studying the binary opposites through the cultural code in the following lines, a structuralist analysis can reaffirm meaning. The previous lines of love, and life, precede images of death. The modal verb used in the sub-clause, 'and I will kill thee' indicates Othello 's determination still to kill Desdemona. The reference to the 'monumental alabaster' creates an image associated with death. Shakespeare 's words refer to a funeral monument, which A.J. Honigmann suggests would be 'where effigies often lie on their backs, heads resting on a stone 'pillow', hands pressed together in prayer'. He supports this also by referring to the candle carried by Othello which also suggests the ''church' tableau' and sees the imagery used by Shakespeare as a possible hint to how the scene might be staged. Moreover, the use of 'alabaster', a translucent, white stone used for tombs, as a 'cultural code' reinforces this image of death.
Rebecca Warren York Notes Advanced Othello (London: Pearson Education Limited, 1998) p. 50.
W. Shakespeare Othello / edited by A. J. Honigmann 3rd ed (Croatia: The Arden Shakespeare, 2001) p.306.
A structuralist reading, considering the genre of the play allows us, also, to question the motives expressed by the protagonist. The monologue expresses private torment concerning the hero and his relationships, thus it is questionable that he cares about what happens to other men. This private theme in tragedy inevitably ends with death and indeed Othello remains intent on murdering Desdemona. The use of the imperative verb in line seven demonstrates this. However, the reference to her as a 'light' suggests that he considers her still to be fair and very much alive. Once again, the text is working on binary opposites in order to create this sense of confusion and anguish.
W. Shakespeare Othello / edited by A. J. Honigmann 3rd ed (Croatia: The Arden Shakespeare, 2001) p.306.
The structuralist approach to texts will recognise that the larger body of the play works on binary opposites not only in theme, but in the language used by Othello. A.C. Bradley considers that "... Othello is, in one sense of the word, by far the most romantic figure among Shakespeare 's heroes." In the duration of the play there is much evidence of this. The language used by Othello is rich and poetic. However, at times when he is passionately tormented, this fluid, sensitive language is lost. In this monologue in the final act of the play, his language seems to suggest that he is, in a sense, returned to his former self. This is illustrated by the insertion of phrases such as 'monumental alabaster' (5.2.5); 'flaming minister' (5.2.8) and later, 'Promethean heat...relume' (5.2.12-13), which 'are notable for the high content of Romance (Latin and French origin) vocabulary. This 'measured formality' is reflective of Othello 's conviction that what he is about to do is a justified sacrifice. 04/02/04.
W. Shakespeare Othello / edited by John O'Connor (China: Pearson Education Limited, 2003) p.216.
Throughout the rest of the passage, the binary polarities become more poignant and by analysing them structurally it is possible to detect a change of mood. In the lines eleven to fifteen, Othello continues to refer to Desdemona as a thing of beauty. He addresses her as 'Thou cunning 'st pattern of excelling nature' and compares her to a 'rose'. These expressions, which suggest life, precede images of death. The metaphor of the 'rose' which 'must wither (5.2.13-15)) is noticeably more subtle than those previous. The mood is one which is of a softer, less passionate nature and evokes in the reader a sympathy that perhaps was not so strong earlier in the monologue. This is aided by the way in which the reflexive verb phrase, 'I repent me', is used. This evokes a sense of regret and guilt.
A structuralist reading through Barthes 's cultural and symbolic codes reveals how this opposition of life and death is reinforced by the negative use of life images. This is evident in the use of the phrase 'Promethean heat', on which Folger writes: cited in: W. Shakespeare Othello / edited by A. J. Honigmann 3rd ed (Croatia: The Arden Shakespeare, 2001) p.306.
Othello claims that he 'know[s] not where' this life giving source is 'That can thy light relume'; Shakespeare is using imagery of life in order to illustrate how completely dead Desdemona will be. He does this again in line fourteen where Othello asserts that he 'cannot give it vital growth again', referring to the metaphoric image of the rose. Othello 's extended use of metaphor can again be understood as him reassuring himself that he is acting out of justice. In the act of  'symbolising his wife' he continues to 'avoid confronting his deed head on." A structuralist understanding of this use of metaphor in creating binary opposites gives us vital signs as to how the tragic hero should perhaps be understood.
Rebecca Warren York Notes Advanced Othello (London: Pearson Education Limited, 1998) p. 50.
The final lines embody the binary opposites used throughout this poignant and dramatic speech, showing fully how Othello can be understood as a tragic hero. The monologue demonstrates the private theme essential to tragedy, illustrating his inner torment. The structure of these end lines gives a sense of finality by summarising these polarities within two lines:
The delicate placing of this emotional opposition solidifies our impression of how Othello is feeling and prepares us for the nature of the following scene.
Analysing the text from a structuralist theoretical stance allows us to grasp a clear sense of meaning from the text on several levels. The concentration on genre, particularly since Othello is a tragedy, makes it possible to understand the passage through the various rules of tragedy. The attention given to the passage as part of a larger structural body - a play - also gives a greater sense of meaning to the lines. The most useful structural techniques in reading this text were the observation of binary opposites and the employment of Barthes 's five codes. However, structuralism seems to limit, perhaps, our psychological understanding of character; Othello is a private tragedy and the psyches of its characters are extremely poignant.
