The term 'meaning' cannot clearly be defined, because, as Joseph Devito explains, it is something that is 'in people' not 'in words'. However, that is not to say that text is inert, that it is incapable of providing a means from which to create a sense of meaning within an individual. By allowing a fictitious environment to inhabit our realm of conscious thought, we are able to comprehend a perspective and sense of reality outside of our own. Therefore it can be seen that an individual 's engagement with a text can be more of a subjective experience than an objective one. It is not possible to understand another individual if one cannot at the same time identify oneself with them. If a reader associates their self with a character in a work of fiction whom it is believed the messages or ideas of the text are being conveyed to, they in return may use the insight gained from the text to put into perspective their own personal context, hence a story is developed far beyond what is merely implied in the text. This story is always different because the context that surrounds an individual is always dynamic, active and as Mercer (2000:21) mentions 'created anew in every interaction between speaker and listener'. Devito (2003:114) explains that 'as you change, you also change the meanings you created out of past messages'. What can be learnt from this statement is that meaning is always in a process of evolvement, continually transforming and therefore is a concept that is always in the process of being understood. This essay will examine the ways in which meaning is mediated through discursive dialogues in Joseph Conrad 's Heart of Darkness, and directors Andy and Larry Wachowski 's 1999 movie The Matrix.
Mercer, N (2000) Words and Minds: How we use language to think together (London: Routledge).
Devito, J.A. (2003) Human Communication: The Basic Course (Boston: Pearson Education Ltd).
An author 's text can draw a reader into a world outside of the one in which they are familiar with. An individual is able to perceive a different reality to the one in which they previously took for granted as a stable, fixed conceptual mode of being. One method of achieving this is through using the text to provoke a response in the reader. An example of this is seen in the following passage from Heart of Darkness, where the story 's protagonist, Marlow, explains to his listeners of the feelings that were incurred by the sounds he heard as he ascended upstream into the Congo:
P51-52 Murfin, R. (ed) (1996) Conrad, J. Heart of Darkness. (New York, Bedford Books).
What is immediately apparent in this passage is the direct address that Marlow makes to his audience with the repetition of the word 'you'. In the story, the 'you' refers to the people aboard a ship that are listening to Marlow recount a voyage undertaken in his younger days. But it can also be seen as a direct address to the reader. Taking this into consideration, we find that the text has an active role. The first theorist to explore the field of pragmatics, J.L Austin, distinguished between two different types of utterance, namely that of constatives, which are descriptive statements, and performatives, which are utterances that perform actions. Hence, if the reader takes the utterance 'you' to be referring to them, the text is performative, it is performing an action in that it is having an active affect on the reader, who would consider not the contextual situation of the fictional narrator, but their own personal life. I.A. Richards (1929:525) points out that 'the personal situation of the reader inevitably (and within limits rightly) affects his reading'. For the reader to interpret their own sense of meaning from this passage they would focus on the indirect and symbolic form of the description given, because they would not be able to experience the sounds of the Congo from the text alone. Barron (2002: 13) states that indirect speech acts occur where the speaker 'means more than what he says', and this is evident in the line ' - you so remote from the night of first ages, could comprehend'. This appears to be use of indirect speech because of the vague description 'night of the first ages'. In the story it might imply that Marlow 's audience are literally far away from the Congo of Africa, but taken as an abstract address to the reader, one may consider that they we as civilised human beings are widely separated from the feelings and emotions felt in a primitive state. Mercer (2001:21) states that conversations are 'not necessarily made up of physical objects and events around the speaker'. The implications Mercer 's statement conveys the notion that readers do not have to relate their own sense of meaning to a literal description in the text. They need not even equate meaning to any ideas or messages Conrad could have originally intended to convey. What is important in order for the text to stimulate any kind of response in the reader is that it merely presents an environment, event or perspective to which the reader can reflect their own experience and point of view against. In this sense, the author 's text is made irrelevant to the process of meaning making.
Richards, I.A. (1929) Practical Criticism (New York: Harcourt).
Barron, A (2002) Acquisition in Interlanguage Pragmatics (Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company).
Mercer, N (2000) Words and Minds: How we use language to think together (London: Routledge).
To further the notion that the mediation of meaning can be created through textual interaction, it is necessary to compare it to another dialogue. In The Matrix, the protagonist of the story, Neo, meets with a character named Morpheus for the first time, in a scene where Morpheus explains that Neo has been living in a projected reality:
Chapter 8, DVD: The Matrix (1999) Wachowski Brothers (Dir) (CA: Warner Brothers).
This passage parallels the last one since the viewer is directly addressed with indirect forms of language. Again the use of 'you' as an address is present, with the vague descriptive language provoking in the viewer a sense of abstract meaning that could readily be applied to their individual life. In the movie, Morpheus is literally referring to the fact that Neo 's sense of reality is actually an illusion perpetuated a computer generated reality known as 'The Matrix', which is what is 'wrong with the world'. However, because the viewer is seemingly directly addressed, a symbolic reading inevitably ensues, leading the viewer to question their own sense of reality. Just as Heart of Darkness could invoke uneasy sensations in the reader about their natural emotions being repressed by civilisation, so to can Morpheus 's dialogue be seen to provoke the same sense of discomfort in the viewer in regards to their accustomed perception of the world. To put this into perspective, post-Jungian Christopher Hauke (2000:202) explains that 'we do not live in a world of 'presentations' but one of re-presentations that are further re-presented in linguistic forms; we are doubly alienated from experience'. Within the context of the movie, Neo is shown that a computer program constructs the world that he believes to be living in, and the real world is actually many years into the future. What this can implicitly invoke in the reader is a sense that technology and civilisation have replaced the natural environment, which in turn seem so commonplace that the urban landscape itself feels like a natural environment. This can also provoke the viewer into questioning their previous natural adaptation to the current urban environment, which as Morpheus states 'You felt it your entire life'. The viewer could therefore examine this 'feeling', or previous perception of reality, by reconsidering the ways in which certain objects can have specific meanings attached to them because of what they subjectively represent and unconsciously evoke feelings of. In this way, the viewer 's  'splinter' can be removed and their meanings given to objects and feelings can be revaluated.
Hauke, C. (2000) Jung and the Postmodern: The Interpretation of Realities. (London, Routledge).
As we have seen, the reader or viewer of a text can be made aware that their unconscious mind can have an extensive influence over that which they perceive. This new, critical perspective on one 's surroundings and the meanings that objects invoke leads to the focus on the readers themselves. Both Heart of Darkness and The Matrix focus on journeys, where the reader may, if viewed within a symbolic context, discover truths about themselves. To do this, a text needs to make the reader aware that just as the world as they experience it is only a product of individual interpretation, so may the concept of the self. The Matrix explains this by way of psychic representation in the scene where Neo meets a character named 'the Oracle':
Morpheus, in Greek mythology, is the god of dreams. An oracle is one who can divine the future, and the rearranging of the word 'Neo' can spell 'one'. Therefore the viewer can assume that the Oracle is addressing them when she says 'Neo', but what she is addressing is less clear. If the many characters Neo is helped by along his journey are constructs of the psyche, then it is possible that they represent aspects of the self. It is likely that Morpheus represents faith, which is a quality associated with dreams in the emotional sense of the word. Hauke (2000:133) states that the other within each individual represents 'lost parts of the personality felt to be foreign and other to the ego but which are calling for inclusion and to be in dialogue with the ego'. The effect that this would have when comprehended by the viewer is that they question the earthly values that they possess, such as faith and love, to see how much of these natural qualities have been retained in their ego, or whether they have been repressed into their unconscious. Lane, Mengham and Tew (2003:3) state that 'the construction of civic identity involves the repression of certain aspects of the self'. This view implies that it is civilization that causes this fragmented sense of self, which an individual can only recover through knowing what parts of the self have been lost. What this sense of incompleteness in the viewer can reveal about the meaning of the self can be explained in religious terms. Because all religions are generally based on the same basic principles, that of seeking certain truths about oneself and the world around us, it is possible that a religious reading of this passage can reveal meaning about the self. The oracle mentions that Morpheus will  'sacrifice his life to save yours'. In many religions, sacrifices, human or other, are often offered to Gods as a form of praise and worship. Grotstein (1998:64) believes that 'the search for God is but another way - in part, albeit - to search for his/her own Unconscious'. This would imply, in the post-Lacan sense that the continual search for meaning, which many groups of people have projected into the idolisation of a form of deity, is merely a sense of something missing that can be rediscovered. What this can induce in the viewer is the idea that they should release the natural emotions within themselves that have been repressed by society and embrace feelings toward an unconscious mode of being in order to regain a sense of self. Therefore any projections of their own psyche, which may have enveloped a sense of meaning, can be eradicated, so that a state of association with all the previously repressed emotions is experienced and any previous sense of meaning is merely immaterial in light of a fresh outlook. A religious reading of psychic constructions can also be taken from Heart of Darkness, when Marlow describes Colonial Kurtz 's strange ceremonial proceedings: ibid, p133.
Lane, R, Mengham, R, and Tew, P (eds) (2003) Contemporary British Fiction (Oxford: Polity Press).
Grotstein (1998) 'The Numinous and immanent nature of the psychoanalytical subject'. Cited in: Hauke, C. (2000) Jung and the Postmodern: The Interpretation of Realities. (London, Routledge).
P66, Murfin, R. (ed) (1996) Conrad, J. Heart of Darkness. (New York, Bedford Books).
A symbolic reading of this passage would imply that 'Mr Kurtz' is Marlow 's projected other, his journey into the Congo being a journey into his inner self to discover his true nature. The 'unspeakable rights' that are 'offered up' to Kurtz is a seemingly vague passage, which instantly arouses the question of what these rights were. It is not, however, important to know this within the context of the story because as has been previously discussed, meaning can only be appreciated and interpreted in the light of the reader 's own context. The reader can construct their own sense of what these rights were, whether they were events from their own life that have created their sense of self or any other interpretation of the rights which remain 'unspeakable'. The question 'do you understand?' appears to address the reader, but can obviously invoke differing responses within separate individuals. With this in mind, the question is seemingly unimportant. The religious analogy imploring the reader to comprehend a sense of self that is separate from the ego seems like the obvious strategy of this passage, but the abstract language leaves the reader free to create their own meanings from the text, which is there merely to incite such thoughts and creative responses.
We have seen how text can invoke responses in the reader to create meanings about themselves and the world around them, but we have not explored any useful purpose for doing so. The last way in which meaning is mediated that shall be explored is the process of self-realization that can occur when one 's perceptions have been reconsidered in light of newly revaluated meanings. We are able to witness this state of self-realization in the following passage from Heart of Darkness, where Marlow reflects on his journey:
P87, Murfin, R. (ed) (1996) Conrad, J. Heart of Darkness. (New York, Bedford Books).
Like all of the passages, the use of 'you' addresses not only the character but also the reader, and can therefore be seen as an attempt to convey what it is to have looked back on oneself. The passage seemingly attempts to explain that self-realization 'comes too late'; therefore not giving advice to the reader but instead showing that text alone cannot create meaning. In the novel, Kurtz died after glimpsing his true self, yet Marlow only got close. This is a similar situation to the reader 's one since this passage is attempting to explain that it can only shed so much light on the truths represented by the text because the reader, with their own evolving context, must discover truths independently. The product of this hopefully would be the inciting of the reader 's creative imagination, in doing which can transform the text as it perceives into a more personal story, integrating philosophical, psychological, religious or any other frameworks with their own lives to create a sense of meaning. The Matrix has a similar moment of imaginative incitation in a scene where Morpheus tells Neo that he must find things out for himself:
Chapter 16. DVD: The Matrix (1999) Wachowski Brothers (Dir) (CA: Warner Brothers).
As in the previous passage, there is an emphasis on the fact that it is the viewer who must obtain enlightenment for themselves, and just as Morpheus cannot grant it to Neo, neither can the dialogue spoken here grant it to the viewer. The dialogue is 'trying to free your mind', but it cannot do it for the viewer. This is because to do so would be to comprehend reality so as to exclude the dialogue itself. To be 'free' in modern times one would need to transcend thoughts of being rooted in the twenty four hour day or any other social construct that limits freedom of thought and creates fixed identities. When you can think outside of yourself, your material being, even though that notion itself is a form of ideological construction, it is possible to examine yourself in the most honest way possible because you would have distanced yourself from your own perspective. The rejuvenated perspective gained from this newly enlightened state prepares one to meet the world with either the despair of passive hopelessness, or with a revived sense of active dynamism.
In all the ways in which meaning is mediated through discursive dialogues, as has been witnessed in the texts studied, meaning has been seen as less of an objective concept and more a subjectively constructed one, which can influenced by external factors such as literature. However, meaning is a concept that is always in the process of being understood because the factors that contribute towards the construction of it, such as context, emotions and perspective, are continually in a state of change. Through the different ways in which text has been shown to mediate meaning, questioning notions of reality and self, it is seemingly the attainment of self-realization that can reveal the ultimate truths in one 's life. The attainment of such a state of mind, however, can only be aroused by text - it is the individual, imaginatively creating their own stories from the text, who are then responsible learn from these truths if any sense of meaning is to be formed.
