The two passages that this essay shall discuss are very similar in terms of character, theme and narrator/speaker intention and they share some stylistic devices too. The two characters, Quoyle and Estha, from 4 a) and 4b) respectively, are presented indirectly through narrative description, instead of direct speech, act, or thought representation. Their joint theme seems to be that the narrator, whoever s/he is, tries to, using varying facts, forms of description and conjecture, account for, or understand the character in question. The main aim of this essay will be to discern and analyse the function of the writers' different techniques that contribute to the narrator-character-reader dynamic.
One of the first things to notice is that whilst 4 b) is simply prose, 4 b) is a shorter piece of prose, with a picture, a dictionary-style definition of 'Quoyle' and the title 'Quoyle' in bold. Before discussing the latter generic and graphological deviations, we will discuss something that the length of the pieces drew attention to. Their differences in length lead to doing a word count: 4 b) has 203 words and 4 a) had 165, which in itself is unremarkable. However, the one hundredth and thirty-sixth word of 4 a) is "thirty-six", which may, or may not be intentional. Either way, it is salient, albeit hidden point, in terms of ways of 'entering' the text. This is because it links up with the idea of chance and randomness in the text, which are signified by such words/phrases as "shuffle" and "counting on nothing" with their gambling connotations. It also links up to the fact that one can enter the text, or indeed enter the life of the character, Quoyle, at any level - as symbolised by the picture of the rope with one end tailing off: anybody can pick it up at any point, beginning, middle or end.
Each narrator, as mentioned before, seems to be trying to comprehend his/her text 's character. However, their approaches, and point-of-view are entirely different. 4 a) 's narrator appears closer to his character than that of 4 b) because he uses deictic expressions like "here is an account" and has intimate knowledge of Quoyle 's physical and mental internal workings:
Although the use of mundane facts, declarative statements and factive verbs ("is") seem factual and reliable, the narrator him/herself points out that it is only one account of Quoyle 's life by the use of the indefinite article "an", so is not a definitive account. On the other hand is the narrator of 4 b), who, by virtue of the character 's silence, has trouble finding any starting points, or any facts to base his judgements on. Indeed, he exclaims that "The fact is that there was n't an 'exactly when'", which is the first of many examples throughout the text in which the narrator explains Estha not in terms of what he is, but what he is not. Furthermore, the more the narrator tries to comprehend Estha 's silence, the more he must re-phrase himself and use more words: he goes on.
The fact that s/he uses six short sentences to repeat the general idea that 'Estha is quiet', portrays the narrator as clearly grappling with this concept. It also sounds like spoken language because, as Stott and Chapman say in Grammar and Writing (2001), "One sentence appears to seep into another and we repeat ourselves in speech much more often than we do in writing." The contrast between the narrator 's search for more words and her/his description of Estha 's diminishing speech highlights how important speech is for this narrator. He defines Estha 's existence by how much 'noise' he makes; he could describe his appearance, his likes/dislikes or any other attribute, but thinks that "Estha occupied very little space in the world" just because he never speaks. Compared to 4 b), this is a very limited description. 4 b) 's narrator tries to describe Quoyle from every conceivable angle: he explores the alternative meanings of his name, draws a picture, says where he was born/where his ancestors are from and discusses his stomach problems, food tastes and jobs. So rather than a descriptive account of what the character does n't say, he gives a factual account of his actions, tastes, whereabouts and so on. Despite these differences, it could be argued that the narrators in both texts are similar because, just like Estha is an enigma to 4 b) 's narrator, Quoyle is like a knot that 4 a) 's narrator is trying to untie, hence the definition of Quoyle from the "ASHLEY BOOK OF KNOTS":
One way of interpreting this is that whoever created the knot symbolises the people who have shaped Quoyle 's life. The fact that the coil was designed "so that it may be walked on if necessary" matches the bullying Quoyle appears to have experienced: "he survived childhood ...[and] camouflaged torment with smiles and silence" - people really have walked all over him. 4 a) and 4 b) both use camouflage imagery to describe how the characters deal with their situation. Just as Quoyle "camouflaged torment" (from the above quotation), Estha.
The silence and chameleon-like behaviour that both characters taught themselves "Over time", is like the Chameleon 's natural defence mechanism against their predators. The use of the word "untrained" above, with its negative prefix, and the later reference to "strangers", suggests that there is somebody else, perhaps the narrator, who has trained their eyes to see him. This would suggest that the narrator is closer to Estha than previously thought, and that although s/he does n't describe his internal/external states, they do share some intimacy.
There is much word play, and striking graphological deviation on the name Quoyle in 4 a). Firstly, it is phonetically identical to the word 'coil', which suggests the text may have a cyclical nature. This is, in fact, true, as it opens with where Quoyle was born and ends with him returning the birthplace of his ancestors. Secondly, the text provides alternative names for 'Quoyle': 'Quoyle', 'Flemish flake', 'coil' and 'knot' all denote the same object. This links into the overall theme that there is no fixed definition of, or starting point to understanding Quoyle 's life. Thirdly and a little tenuously, the picture of the coil of rope looks like a backwards 'Q', which would be a further visual representation of the Quoyle 's name. The statement could either refer to the following written account of his life, or to the afore mentioned rope/backwards 'Q' situated just above the statement. This is reinforced by the fact that the sentence stands alone as a paragraph, separate from the rest of the text. To stretch the interpretation of the coil even further, one could view the surrounding blank space, which is a graphological feature precisely because it takes up so much of the page 's layout, as symbolic of Quoyle 's loneliness and the feeling of drifting. This sense of loneliness and 'drifting' is expressed by nautical imagery, such as "on deck" and "steered away" which create the sense that Quoyle is like a drifting ship on a voyage of self-exploration.
The texts are temporally similar: they are both written (mostly) in the past tense, and the time elapsed in the fictional world is skimmed over similarly in both texts. In 4 b), the writer often uses the construction 'had + main verb' to create the past tense, for example, "Estha had always been a quiet child", "he had stopped talking", "It had been a gradual winding down", "Over time he had acquired" and so on. The auxiliary 'had' creates the continuous past tense, which contributes to the sense that Estha 's "winding down" took a long time, and was not a sudden, noticeable 'event'. This gradual, protracted process adds to the sense of the narrator 's difficulty locating exact time frames when the character does n't speak. This raises the question, 'does lack of speech render Estha non-existent'? It certainly does to the "strangers" who took "a while to notice him even when they are in the same room as him" or "never noticed at all." Like 4 b) cannot even differentiate "the year, if not the month or day" without speech as a guideline, 4 a) 's timeline speeds up/slows down according to Quoyle 's mental state. He speeds through Quoyle 's life until his thirties - and suddenly, when Quoyle feels "bereft, brimming with grief and thwarted love", we have the exact age, thirty-six. The fact that the time specificity coincides with Quoyle 's "grief and thwarted love", when he used to "separate his feelings from his life", clearly shows the subjectivity of peoples' perception of time. The return of feeling and decision to return to his homeland, Newfoundland, are patently key moments in Quoyle 's life, hence the time scale zooms-in to an exact year.
The syntactical and lexical choices the writers have made reinforce many of the effects discussed so far. For example in 4 a), the lack of the personal pronoun 'he' in "Stumbled through his twenties..." foregrounds the haphazard, accidental way Quoyle seems to have fell into his twenties. The bright, clear-sounding phonaestheme  'st' in "stumbled" and the short low-vowel sound / / also contribute to this effect. There is an interesting interplay between simple sentences and long, heavily subordinated sentences in both texts. For instance in 4 a), the contrast between and enhances the fact that Quoyle knows what food he likes; that 's simple. The meandering of the second complex sentence feels much more tentative, which is appropriate to the more sensitive subject matter. In 4 b) there are three main large, complex sentences that are surrounded by shorter, single clause sentences such as these three, and the final sentence,.
They are foregrounded because of the contrast in length, which gives a note of pathos to the narrative, and points to the futility of the narrator repeating her/himself, or using complicated allegories like "the psychological equivalent of what lungfish do to get themselves through the dry season", when a simple sentence will do. The complex sentences also seem less factive because they are more highly modified: "no one could pinpoint with any degree of accuracy exactly when..." This uncertainty is augmented by the use of cognition verbs such as "notice" and the comparative "As though" used to aid the narrator 's thought.
This essay has started to explore the infinite number of ways to read the texts. The self-aware style of 4 a) 's narrator, who disclaims "Here is an account", reflects how limited his view is, and how any reader 's interpretation is never conclusive. The style of 4 b) is less self-assured and critically aware; instead, it is like we are listening to the vocalisation of the narrator 's puzzlement over Estha 's taciturnity. Despite this, we do trust 4 b) 's narrator 's judgement, because of his implicit emotional deictic proximity to Estha, as discussed earlier. The essay has examined how both writers engineer time scales to suit the narrative subject and tone, which is just one form of the utter subjectivity of narrative/character/reader perceptions. Thus 4 a), by providing multi-layered access to the text and Quoyle 's life, and 4 b) by openly showing the narrator 's flaws and thought processes, express the living, changing and fallible nature of character representation in prose.
