Within the five years under investigation, Accor adapted to its environment as well as it aimed to manipulate where possible. The fast changing environment forced Accor to follow and form trends in technology as well as in service standards and procedures. Due to increasing customer sophistication (Stone in HospitalityNet, 2003), Accor followed its competitors in offering lowest price guarantees through its corporate websites, the websites itself emerging by adaptation. Accorhotels.com has been developed late after Marriott, Hilton and Starwood set up their online portals (O'Connor, 2001). Enormous success, however, has been identified (Datamonitor, 2004, and Koumelis, 2005).
More important, however, is the extent of manipulation of the competitive environment through Accor 's leadership. In 2001, Accor launched Suitehotels, a new brand focusing on business travellers (Hospitality Net, 2001). Specialising in the business sector, hence integrating all special needs of the business customer segment, disrupted the market (D'Aveni, 1995).
No reaction of competitors has been identified. This might be due to the downturn of economy after September 11 th, and decreasing arrivals of business customers.
In addition, Accor 's aggressive growth and development strategy in Europe can be seen as disruptive, especially in the light of economic downturn. Taking up the opportunity to increase leadership in the European market (Espalioux in Matlack & Cohn, 2003), prepares Accor for future growth and stability, once economy recovers. This is true especially for the budget sector, which is not as sensible to economic changes as mid-scale and luxury brands (Matlack & Cohn, 2003).
A major change in the competitive environment has been provoked by Accor, emphasising a 'green' approach. Accor 's holistic model of environmental policy (TOI, 2001) has been marketed strongly. Increasing brand awareness and customer perception alongside with Accor 's cooperation with national and international bodies (Bohdanowicz and Martinac, 2003) had a 'ripple effect' on competitors as well as firms outside the sector, too (Kassinis & Soteriou, 2003). As environmental hospitality is seen to grow in future (Enz & Siguaw, 1999) competitors adapt and integrate 'green' policies into their strategies. No evidence though has been found that InterContinental Hotels adapted or implemented an environmental model yet.
Hospitality firms have recognized the significance of information technology (IT) for competitive business strategies (Armijos et al., 2002). Hospitality firms however did not use IT innovations effectively yet (Brown and Stange, 2002). Wireless LAN nevertheless increased in importance throughout the last years (Stallings, 2002). Mariott in 2002 was one of the pioneers integrating wireless LAN in the UK (Clark, 2004). From a European point of view, Accor adapted to its environment, however, Accor was the first organisation to implement wireless LAN in France in its Formula 1 and Sofitel brands (Datamonitor, 2004). Accor therefore disturbed the French market through differentiation. Competitors, hence, had to adapt rapidly. Concluding, one can say that Accor in general belongs to the pioneers, aiming to manipulate the market and to confirm its European leadership (MKG Consulting, 2005).
Based on the critical success factors and on the space of possibilities identified in Carpenteral. (2005), Accor 's business strategy will be built on three pillars: continuous growth in line with profitability (see Appendix A), stakeholder satisfaction (see Appendix B), and environmental protection (see also Appendix C). Accor will continue its strategy of dominance (Gause, 1964) through diversification, product and market development, and market penetration (Ansoff, 1965). Alliances with travel intermediaries and external organisations will further support the firm to remain competitive and in control of the market.
Accor will maintain its culture of risk and continue to expand aggressively into new European markets. Although the economy has not yet regained its power, low brand penetration enables firms to expand into the European market (Altinay & Altinay, 2003). The focus will differ for Eastern and Western Europe due to the reasons identified in Carpenteral. (2005). This expansion will go in line with heavy branding and marketing of environmental sustainability.
Exploiting existing products parallel to exploration of new ideas will ensure a competitive edge. Customers have to be involved in design and development stages. Prompt deployment of new technology is paramount for success and surprise (D'Aveni, 1995). A combination of 'clockware' and  'swarmware' approach (Bonabeau & Meyer, 2001), along with trained and empowered multi-skilled units experimenting in different market segments, will raise new ideas. Innovations have to satisfy two requirements: profitability and to exceed customer expectations. If satisfied, units have to call for reasonable resources needed to implement the new ideas. Continuous new ideas and changes in the service offer will disrupt the market and challenge competitors.
New ideas and innovations will also arise through generative relationships (Lane & Maxfield, 1996), i.e. with IT professionals and other external organisations. Connecting external and internal forces will add new value to the products and services, hence, improve quality standards (Kim and Oh, 2004). There are no sustainable advantages in a hypercompetitive environment (D'Aveni, 1995). Accor will follow a delayered strategy of "sense and respond ... to propagate(s) wildly before mimicry of competition sets in" (Meyer & Davis, 2003:143). Continuous market research by Accor and external agencies will ensure an objective analysis of the market, its needs and potential.
Market disruption will be ensured through several methods. Focus on all four strategies outlined by Ansoff (1965) will make it more difficult for competitors to adapt. Identification of trends at an early stage and constant communication between stakeholders will facilitate product development and innovation. Concurrent experimentation at different levels and with different products and services and regular announcements of developments and deployments of new products will add extra pressure on competitors.
Hospitality industry 's main assets are people (Storey & Sisson, 1993), serving intangible products, which are often produced and consumed at the same time. Furthermore, humans are not machines, acting rationally and linear. A modern hospitality organisation, hence, has to appreciate, respect and understand human individuality and the consequences of communication and interaction between these individuals (Zimmerman et al., 2001).
Metaphors are used to see things differently, from another perspective in order to enable emergence of new ideas (Morgan, 1997). Accor is the leader in the European hospitality industry. A metaphor describing its strength, hence, is best that of a horse. Well prepared for the fast changing hospitality industry, a horse is highly sensible and attentive to its environment and fast in its reactions with a good extent of temperament. Slow movements or big jumps over obstacles are no problems. Accor 's executive management board only changed once in 1997 when its founders made place to a successor. A horse like the company is loyal to its leadership. In addition, horses learn from their leaders and from experience. They adapt to new situations and have the sixth sense for emerging problems and trends. This latter talent is important for successful interaction with consumers, as customer satisfaction and loyalty will result in profits, an ultimate purpose of the organisation. Finally, Accor being a horse will successfully apply its strategy of rapid growth and development, using all its strength to enter the European market. Sensors and reactors of a horse perfectly communicate and interact like a complex adaptive system to respond rapidly and efficiently.
Accor 's vision is to remain European leader in the hospitality sector through continuous growth and profitability (see also Appendix C). However, a vision cannot be translated into a position a firm will reach, because it is the emergence out of a manager 's behaviour, which creates order out of chaos (Stacey, 2003) and directs the company. Planning the future is not possible (Zimmerman et al., 2001). Accor therefore will apply only a few rules (Pascale, Millemann & Gioja, 2000:145), which set the boundaries in which employees working in a complex adaptive system (CAS) are self-oriented and allowed to make mistakes. Each department, unit or brand is self-organised and has full autonomy. Layers of bureaucracy will be removed (Meyer & Davis, 2003). Management will not provide answers and dictate procedures, but will question and perform inquiries in order to reveal the full potential of the organisation. In order to remain part of Accor, the only requirements to fulfil are: top profitability within its sector and highly satisfied customers through innovative ideas. With only these two rule, each unit (agent) is driven towards the edge of chaos due to the pressure imposed, however, creativity and autonomy are challenged (Morgan, 1997).
Both approaches do not exclude each other, it is rather important to find the right mix. Accor will have a 'clockware' approach in its routine, standardized service and production offers (Kelly, 1995), where customers expect high standardised quality. 'Swarmware' in contrast is applied in all non-routine tasks. Innovation is driven by this approach and in situations where the employee, unit or firm has to adapt,  'swarmware' will reveal creative solutions. In order to gain most of the approach, managers have to generate a tension between discipline and freedom in order to create a self-organised, creative work environment. In order to achieve the goals of the vision, Accor 's workforce has to be homogenous, not in its character, but in the ownership of abilities of critical thinking, creativity and intellectual capacity. Accor 's leadership will facilitate and encourage experiments, granting the freedom of failures, from which employees and the firm will learn and further develop their knowledge, while percolating and applying best outcomes.
Having established an environment of creativity and learning, leadership of the firm has now to apply selective pressure on its employees. This can be done by pushing them to results and to deliver through interactive control systems, constantly reviewing the processes and developments (Morgan, 1997). Regular meetings between management and workforce, where status of projects is analysed and reflected on and pressure to solutions is applied, will facilitate further creativity and will move the organisation to the edge.
An organisation can be compared with a heart, which beats irregularly and unpredictable (Zimmerman et al., 2001). Reaching the point of regularity or linearity would be the 'death' of the firm. Accor 's leadership therefore has to control the flow of information, maintain a 'right' degree of diversity, and maintain internal and external connectivity (Zimmerman et al., 2001). Horizontal and vertical connectivity is imperative. Cross-functional meetings and communication with external partners will facilitate learning and increase efficiency. Projects will be dealt with people from different departments, however, it is to their own judgement to what extent they participate or whom they involve.
Organisations, where tension and stress are embraced with denial and smoothing, do not learn efficiently (Zimmerman et al., 2001). Accor 's way of coping with tension and stress is addressed somehow differently. Work groups will be formed with people of high diversity and contrasting opinions in order to work towards one common goal. The tensions in these groups will unleash creativity and will provide results, which are not a compromise of single opinions, but one outcome incorporating the two points of views. In addition, leadership will empower its workforce and delegate responsibility onto the workers shoulders. It might be a challenge for some of them, but this will put them at the edge of chaos, where creativity emerges.
Furthermore, Accor will install a review procedure where front line employees, who are the people closest to the work, will collect information and ideas in order to revise procedures and processes, hence, to increase efficiency and productivity. Learning and adapting not only increases effectiveness but also gains involvement of employees.
Accor 's structure can be seen as a modular system, many small units building together one large organisation. This allows higher flexibility and more efficiency as well as failures in one unit, have a smaller impact on the whole firm. More important, however, it allows working on many different tasks and projects at the same time. Leadership will observe and communicate with the units and reflect on the results each offers. Identification of successful projects and support through group recruitment (Bonabeau & Meyer, 2001) will form the direction the firm is taking. Management is probing ideas and projects and learning from reflections (Morgan, 1997). The time resources are allocated to valuable projects is limited until a better and more valuable project is identified.
Communication in organisations is twofold: formal and informal. The informal shadow system, however, can serve as a facilitator of creativity and innovation (Stacey, 2003). Few rules and the tension to the formal legitimate system are similar to the  'swarmware' approach. Efficient use and understanding of the shadow system are important to gain advantages from it (Zimmerman et al., 2001). The tension between the formal and informal system drive the organisation towards the edge of chaos where change can occur (Stacey, 2003).
Accor encourages cross-functional support, parallel to the official structure. Hence, the firm establishes connections, which have been overlooked in the formal structure (Zimmerman et al., 2001). The absence of formal control and monitoring enables employees to be creative and to initiate change (Shaw, 1997).
Informal monthly meetings for employees interested in discussing organisational affairs will be established. These meetings will enable emergence of new ideas (bottom-up approach) and build connections between people, who do not have direct contact in daily operations. The meetings once initiated will then be self-directed by attendees.
In order to enable connectivity between various building blocks within Accor, self-organisation has to be supported. Nodes and Connections form the networks (Pascaleal. 2000). Accor will establish nodes, i.e. meetings, presentations and workgroups, across all functions and brands. Furthermore, external 'agents' will be invited to widen the scope of knowledge and to enable connections outside the firm. External connections and the cooperation of employees across different functions on different projects will increase the relationship and unite the units to form a well connected complex adaptive system, which is directed by self-organisation of its 'agents'.
Organisations in a hypercompetitive market have to cooperate to some extent in order to survive. Although Accor is focusing on dominance (Gause, 1964) in its market, it will engage with some form of strategic alliance with its competitors. Accor hence aims to some extent to a state of co-existence. One important alliance with competitors is to regain direct access to customers. Intermediaries have gained huge power with the development of IT and the internet. Alliances will therefore work together while setting up own websites, re-establishing direct consumer contacts.
A further alliance will be formed in order to reduce costs. Cooperation with competitors will increase negotiation power over suppliers. Accor at the same time will use its power to set up environmental standards which have to be adopted by suppliers and competitors, if they want to join the alliance. A few rules will put pressure on competitors and provide opportunity for growth in favour of Accor. In general, however, Accor is reviewing these alliances regularly as it is important that the relationship is co-evolving and not based on a static relationship (Eisenhardt & Galunic, 2000).
In applying complexity theory to Accor 's strategy the company will not only obtain a competitive edge, but also ensure consistent and continuous internal change. Few simple rules, horizontal and vertical connectivity as well as external observation and cooperation provide a solid base for future growth and development of the firm. Parallel focus on  'swarmware' and 'clockware' approach will drive the firm towards the edge of chaos, enhancing creativity and innovation while standardised operations ensure high quality levels of customer service.
