Despite growing evidence and increasing demand for business expatriates, women remain to be an untapped resource for international assignments. Secondary research was therefore conducted to analyse the myths and reasons female expatriates face, on their way to higher senior management positions. Several factors are established, which underline that female expatriates encounter obstacles based primarily on stereotypical views and male prejudice. The findings also suggest that organisation are reluctant to provide expatriates with appropriate training for successful adjustment in the host country. Thus, practical recommendations for how to maximise the likelihood of success for female expatriates on global assignments as well as further research implications are given.
Expatriates, global assignments, hospitality industry, women in management, cross - cultural competencies.
According to recent research has the number of business people, who go overseas, considerably increased in the last 20 twenty years, more than any other period in history (Sinangil and Ones 2003). Therefore, it is not surprising that the development of successful expatriate managers has become increasingly important (Ashamalla 1998). These expatriates are vital for any global company as they are responsible for example, the facilitation of the communication process between the parent organisation and the operations abroad as well as across foreign subsidiaries (Izraeli et.al. 1980, Selmer and Leung 2002). ,.
In addition found Boyacigiller (1990) that expatriation leads to a competitive advantage in creating a pool of cosmopolitan executives sensitive to international opportunities and threats.
However, companies are faced with an issue that has occurred due to the rapid increase of continuing globalisation. The supply of people wanting to pursue an expatriate career has not grown at the same rate as expected, which has resulted in a lack of expatriate managers. Caligiuri and Cascio (1998) observe, "...the availability of people who are willing to accept global assignments is not growing at the same rapid rate. In fact, multinational companies report that finding enough of the right people with the requisite skills for global assignments is one of their greatest international human resource concerns" (Caligiuri and Cascio 1998, p394).
An important issue to consider, before analysing the situation of female expatriates across multinational corporations, is to differentiate between women managers in general and female global assignees. As literature research suggests is the number of women managers from different industries in Australia, Canada and the USA proportionally higher compared to female expatriate managers (Caligiuri and Lazarova 2002). This trend is underlined by Linehan and Scullion (2001) who found less than 14 per cent of American global assignees are women compared to 45 per cent of women in management generally. The situation of women managers in the hospitality industry however, is different compared to other industries sectors. In fact very few women are represented in higher management and/or senior management positions, as suggested by Maxwell (1997). He found that only 8 per cent of senior executives and 0,5 per cent of executive directors are female. Moreover, research shows that female expatriates have traditionally been excluded from the pool of potential candidates (Jelinek and Adler 1988, Westwood and Leung 1994, Linehan and Walsh 1999, Stroh et.al. 2000). Caligiuri and Tung (1999) for example found, "In the international business arena, until the late 1980 's, only 5 per cent of all American expatriates, 1 per cent of Japanese expatriates and 9 per cent of Finnish expatriates were women" (Caligiuri and Tung 1999, p763). The figures in Europe and Australia are even proportionally lower. This indicates that companies overlook an important opportunity by excluding women from expatriate positions, as they could be the answer for the general expatriate shortage.
The aim of this article is therefore to analyse the persistent barriers and challenges female expatriates face in the hospitality industry. This will be achieved by firstly examining myths and realities regarding the shortage of female expatriates in multinational companies. The second part of the article is concerned with improvements that can be made by companies to increase the level of female expatriate representation on a global scale. This is important as the employment of more women in the international hospitality workforce by multinational companies would not only enhance the quality of the workforce diversity, but also help to build a more inclusive context in expatriate assignments.
Traditionally, three reasons have been put forward for the low number of female expatriates: (1) women are not interested in international careers, (2) organisations refuse to send women employees abroad for fear of poor job performance in foreign cultures, and (3) foreign cultures discriminate against women (Adler 1987). However, research has shown that none of these assumptions is correct. In fact Adler (1984) conducted a large-scale research to find evidence that would support the first myth. The study involved MBA students and no significant differences between men and women were found in the willingness to accept international assignments. Moreover, analysed Gliatis and Guerrier (1994) that people who work in the hospitality sector are somehow more enthusiastic about international assignments. They authors state, "...hotel companies experience fewer problems in the management of international assignments than many other multinational companies. They attract managers who are enthusiastic about an international career and have developed ways of managing careers on a global basis" (Gliatis and Guerrier 1994, p239). The second myth was also found to be untrue as Stroh et.al. (2000) investigated. The authors found that, while organisations report that they are not less likely to send female expatriates than their male counterparts abroad, expatriate women report the opposite to be true. The third myth has been empirically investigated by Sinangil and Ones (2003) who have found that employing female expatriates in Turkey does not seem to be an issue even though the dominant culture in Turkey is not perceived by Western executives to be particularly friendly to female managers (Sinangil and Ones 2003, p470). However, research from Caligiuri and Lazarova (2002) has shown that this statement is only correct to a certain extend. The authors have found that women were less cross-culturally adjusted than men in countries with low female workforce participation and a lower percentage of women managers (Caligiuri and Lazarova 2002, p761). This factor is crucial for expatriate managers as it can decide between the success and failure of an assignment. If the expatriate managers fails to successfully adapt to the host countries culture than the whole assignment can be jeopardised. Nonetheless, the overall picture shows clearly that female expatriates do have an interest in international assignments and the myths do not necessarily reflect the reality. It is therefore important to analyse the real reasons for the lack of female expatriates in multinational organisations.
Although women in all industry sectors make up almost half of the total global workforce, they are highly underrepresented at the senior management level and in positions of authority domestically and as expatriates internationally (Caligiuri and Tung 1999). Authors such as Linehan and Scullion (2001) argue that women managers are confronted by a glass ceiling, which prevents them from advancing into higher management positions. This glass ceiling is a metaphor for obstacles women experience that male managers normally do not encounter. These barriers start with the selection process of female expatriates for international assignments. It has been argued that expatriate assignments involve a high level of uncertainty due to the unknown territory the manager is facing when accepting an assignment. In the absence of reliable knowledge, future performance predictions or situations where past experience is limited, senior managers tend to rely on the use of stereotypes, rather than actual performance from female managers to make expatriate selections (Selmer and Leung 2002). Linehan and Walsh (1999) underline this argument by stating, "It is suggested that the greater the uncertainty, the smaller the probability that a multinational corporation will assign a woman to an expatriate role, and under conditions of high uncertainty, headquarters will prefer men as expatriates (Linehan and Walsh 1999, p523). The senior managers making the selection decisions tend to be male and it is therefore not surprising that the majority of expatriate assignments are largely distributed to male candidates (Harris 1995). Female expatriates on the other hand have to constantly raise the attention of senior managers in order to be even considered for the selection process.
Research conducted by Guerrier (1986) highlights an issue that has, until recently, not being investigated thoroughly by the literature. The author has argued that women themselves are responsible for the lack of success in multinational companies. She has found that women in the hospitality industry generally tend to have less self - confidence and self - esteem than men. This means that women were prepared to settle for lower - level jobs in the organisation, and some even supported the same stereotypical views of women as managers as men (Guerrier 1986, p237). Moreover, recent research conducted by Fischlmayr (2002) shows that these assumptions are persistent and remain to be a significant factor for the under - representation of female expatriates on international assignments. The author 's research was based on interviews with 21 Austrian expatriates from different industry sectors, and has found that particularly female expatriates are often a barrier to their own career, as they behave according to gender - based role models. These self-inflicted barriers are perpetrated by behaving according to stereotypical expectations like for example, female team members serving coffee when no one else in the group stands up to do so. The author has examined that this behaviour is part of a gender - based education were, from infancy on, girls are taught to play the 'typical' female role (Fischlmayr 2002, p779), which can inevitably lead to the loss of confidence and self - esteem in the employment environment. Other factors of this behaviour include the use of vocabulary, which reflects the women 's weak self - perception and self - underestimation. This includes portraying a poor self - image rather than emphasising the female 's individual performance. Combining these factors, it becomes clear that not only external but also internal forces are evident for the seldom selection of female expatriates on international assignments.
An additional reason for the few female expatriates in multinational corporations can be identified as the inability to combine career and family matters successfully. A factor closely linked to the stereotyping phenomenon. Research shows that managing relationships while on international assignments remains one of the major challenges for female expatriates (Linehan and Scullion 2001, Caligiuri et.al. 1999, Harvey et.al. 1999, Harvey 1998, Webb 1996). The unfortunate reality for many female expatriates, who are strongly committed to their managerial careers, is the sacrifice of their dreams of a family for the sake of their profession.
The acceptance of an international assignment places many married couples in a problematic situation, as it usually requires an accompanying spouse to forfeit the accustomed structure and continuity of his/her life (Linehan and Scullion 2001). This can be particularly difficult for male spouses, as they are considered to be the primary breadwinners in a relationship, and are therefore normally not prepared to sacrifice their lifestyle for the sake of their wives' career (Caligiuri and Cascio 1998). This argument is further developed by Spiker-Miller and Kees (1995) who state, "...in the majority of dual-career couples, both spouses participate in gender stereotyping regarding household roles and have the mind-set that the bulk of the responsibility for making the career and family life coordinate satisfactorily will fall on the woman" (Spiker-Miller and Kees 1995, p3). This stereotyping phenomenon results in women not being able to progress their careers into higher senior management positions, as they are expected to follow the traditional role of being a housewife, rather than the non-traditional role of, for instance a successful expatriate manager, that they wish to add to their lives. Although there are examples of female expatriates who have managed to balance private and professional life successfully, the reality for the majority of female managers is the loss of their personal life for the sake of their professional career (Linehan and Scullion 2001). On the other side, dual - career couples are becoming more common in multinational companies, which indicates that partners, who have a prospering relationship, are less willing to break or abandon their careers (Jackson 1995). This statement is underlined by Selmer and Leung (2002) who comment, "As many as 15 percent of expatriate candidates have been reported to reject offers of foreign assignments due to the career of their spouse/partner, and this figure may increase in the future, especially in Western Europe and North America" (Selmer and Leung 2002, p349). This trend indicates that companies need to ensure that management executives implement propitious measurements in order to retain, improve and also attract female expatriates for future assignments.
One of the significant and urgent alterations companies have to make is the change of recruitment and selection procedures in order to attract a more globally - qualified pool of female applicants. This includes increased emphasis on multiple language proficiency and job descriptions, which help companies to have a globally competent group of recruits (Ashamalla 1998). Current research on expatriate selection and recruitment procedures however, highlights that organisations rely on technical expertise and knowledge of the company rather than cross - cultural fluency (Harris and Kumra 2000). In fact, many managers assume that technical expertise is the most important criterion in selecting employees for international assignments (Webb 1996). Competencies such as cultural sensitivity, interpersonal skills, adaptability and flexibility on the other hand are rarely taken into consideration. Although technical competence is an important factor, it cannot be forgotten that the ability to build relationships with the host country nationals increases the probability of a successful assignment by a large degree. Moreover, the tendency for companies to rely on the technical competencies approach is seen as a determinant for expatriate failure rather than success (Reuben 1989). That this factor cannot be underestimated is proven by statistics of expatriate failure, which show that 16 - 40 per cent return prematurely from their assignments (Kaye and Taylor 1997). Furthermore, have these failures a tremendous impact on a company 's financial situation. Authors like Ashamalla (1998) estimated that the costs of expatriate failure could reach staggering numbers of up to $1 million. It is therefore crucial to select expatriates who are better suited for cross - cultural situations, rather than depending on technical competencies.
Particularly women managers are regarded in the literature as being more flexible and inclusive managers compared to their male counterparts (Guthrie and Ash 2003). Westwood and Leung (1994), for example, reported that in their qualitative results, a number of female expatriate respondents perceived that women benefited from being more sensitive, interpersonally aware, empathetic and sociable than men. Additionally, Selmer and Leung (2003) have conducted profound research, which compared international Western female and male business expatriates in Hong Kong and has found that female expatriates have higher interaction and work adjustment abilities than their male counterparts. Therefore, in a cultural context where business can be promoted through interpersonal interactions, like the hospitality industry, female expatriates may have an edge over their male counterparts. Furthermore, respondents from a survey conducted by Chung-Herrera et.al. (2003) have identified flexibility, adaptability, interpersonal skills, effective communication abilities and commitment to quality as some of the crucial competencies required for future hospitality leaders. It can therefore be argued that female expatriates not only have an edge over their male counterparts, but also seem to have the necessary skills and abilities to perform similar, if not better, on international assignments compared to their male candidates. However, it is only by recognising and appreciating cross - cultural differences across countries that the competencies of female expatriates will be truly valued. Companies that continue to believe that theories developed within the cultural context of one country can with good effect be applied to another, will never be able to recognise the importance of female expatriates for the industry (Morden 1995).
However, selection and recruitment enhancements can only be seen as the first step in an overall program, which should be designated to improve the situation of female expatriates on international assignments. Because once the expatriate is assigned, it is of significant importance that companies persist in their efforts to facilitate the cross - cultural adjustment of their female expatriates throughout the entire period of their overseas assignments (Caligiuri et.al. 1999). These efforts are summarised by Caligiuri and Cascio (1998) who identified individual characteristics, organisation 's policies and practices, family adjustment, and host national attitudes as essential for the success female expatriates (Figure 1). The first category, individual characteristics, is linked to the competencies discussed earlier, including self - efficacy, openness and flexibility, which need to be considered before selecting female expatriates for international assignments.
Organisation policies and practices, identified as the second paragraph, should be designed to train and prepare expatriates ahead of their assignment, on the norms and traditions regarding potentially challenging situations women may face in the new work environment. This type of pre - departure training will help expatriates not only to adjust, but also to become familiar to the life in a foreign culture. This is achieved by for example, providing information and guidance by using cultural specific trainings, assimilators, readings, films, role-plays, case studies and interactive language training (Harris and Kumra 2000; Mendenhall et.al. 1995). In order to ensure appropriate training, it is necessary for the organisation to allocate financial resources, which will be minimal compared to the cost of failed expatriate assignments (Webb 1996). Furthermore, it has been suggested to employ a mentor that assists the expatriates in providing psychosocial support while he/she is overseas. In addition can mentors act as a liaison, counsellor and protector of the expatriate 's best interests. Linehan and Scullion (2001) explain further, "...while partaking in international assignments, mentors provide the contact and support from the home organisation which in turn facilitates re - entry - in addition to improving the self - confidence of prot  g  es, increasing their visibility in organisations and increasing their promotional prospects" (Linehan and Scullion 2001, p406). As the statement suggests, mentors have been associated beneficial for the facilitation of expatriate 's career advancement into senior management positions. In fact Adler and Izraeli (1994) acknowledged further that women enjoy more promotions and power as well as greater job mobility and easier access to powerful individuals in the organisation after obtaining a mentor.
Moreover, recent research has shown that family adjustment can also be identified as a factor related to the successful integration of expatriates into the new and unfamiliar culture environment (Webb 1996). Harris (2004) for example states that women who receive satisfactory organisational support for partner and children concerns will experience less-work conflict than women who do not. This is essential for female expatriates as the lack of family support during international assignments is seen as the primary reason for expatriate failure (Selmer and Leung 2002). Several solutions have been identified to assist organisations in developing training schemes for the successful adaptation of families and spouses. Some authors suggest pre-preparation training for families similar to the organisation policies and practices identified earlier (Caligiuri and Cascio 1998), while others writers go further in suggesting that organisations can assist families with working permits and other work related arrangements (Ruisala and Suutari 2000). However, research has also shown that assistance in family related issues is not common practice in organisations (Harvey 1995), which is unfortunate as it negatively affects the expatriates productivity, performance and morale, factors that can lead to the likelihood of premature expatriate return.
The last category focuses on the attitude of the host nationals, with whom the female expatriates will be conducting business. A fundamental concern for many organisations is the question whether or not host nationals will do business with female expatriates. Research conducted by Adler (1994) addressed this issue and found that being a women manager served more as an advantage than a disadvantage in their foreign managerial positions. She states further that female expatriates are first and foremost seen as foreigners (gaijin) and not as local people, and women are therefore not expected to act like local women. Adler (1994) goes on, "...the societal and cultural rules, governing the behaviour of local women, which limit their access to managerial positions and responsibility do not apply to foreign women" (Adler 1994, p36). Hence, can organisations be more confident in using female expatriates for international assignments.
This research has shown that the reason for the low number of female expatriates on international assignments is primarily based on stereotypical perceptions and myths. The majority of senior male executives, who are responsible for expatriate recruitment, judge female managers not on their capabilities and actual performance skills on the job, but rather on clich  s. Metaphors such as the glass-ceiling phenomenon give a clear indication of the barriers female 's manager 's, throughout the world, encounter on their progression to the top management level. In addition, the amount of family and spouse support provided by corporations is minimal, which result in female expatriates not being able to commit themselves to international assignments in fear of loosing their private life. Another assumption made by companies is the belief that female expatriates are more likely to be discriminated in countries that have male dominated hierarchies in their organisations. Research however, has shown that women are accepted in these cultures, which is particularly the result of their feminine competencies. This work has therefore argued that organisations need to select and recruit expatriates not on their technical expertise, but on for example, intercultural sensitivity, empathy, and cultural awareness. Moreover, is it important for organisations to implement appropriate training schemes and pre - departure assistants for female expatriates to reduce the likelihood of failure while on assignments. In sum, this article has provided several vital factors to increase the success rate of female expatriates who are employed by multinational organisations. However, the barriers and challenges female expatriates face will only start to evaporate when male managers forget about stereotyping and clich  s, and start to see female managers for what they truly are, the essence of business success.
Further research should try to find out how multinational hotel companies recruit and select expatriates in reality. Although the literature emphasises certain crucial competencies for expatriates that are needed to succeed on international assignments, limited research has so far investigated to what extend the suggestions are put into practise.
