Information Communication Technology 's (ICT) application into tourism has revolutionized the industry since 1950s; nowadays, the rapid development of Internet and computerized systems promote the change and become a key force. Nowadays, ICT has changed tourism industry structure all around the world (Ma et al., 2003), especially in distribution, whose initial purposes is 'information, combination and travel arrangement services' defined by Buhalis (2003). Computerized Reservation System (CRS), Global Distribution System (GDS), and Internet, all of them play significant roles in facilitating tourism distribution.
Today travel becomes one of the most popular products sold over the internet (O'Connor, 2001). Facing the trend, this essay is going to explore tourism distribution channels on the Internet. It begins with a literature review of electronic distribution in travel and tourism industry from different angles. The essay chooses and evaluates three different distribution channels on Internet from consumer perspective. Based on the consumer 's experience, it sets out to discuss those implications from organisation perspective. It is aimed to provide valuable recommendations for tourism organisations at the end.
To provide information and to facilitate customer purchase are two main functions of distribution (Bowie & Buttle, 2004). Services and information are delivered by various distribution channels to match information to the right consumers, time and place (Go and Pine, 1995). Besides, distribution is also one of the most important marketing strategies and the largest cost in the marketing budget (Buhalis, 2003). In tourism industry, distribution channels are made up from principals, intermediaries and consumers. Some examples are shown below.
From the adoption of CRS from airline industry in 1950s, conversion to GDS in 1980s, tourism organisations use ICT as an important tool to exchange information, deliver reservation and communicate with customers. Particularly today World Wide Web offers industries unique opportunities (MacDonald, 1997) and enables principals to communicate directly to consumers via their own website (Carroll & Siguaw, 2003). Consequently, principals benefit from cost reduction, revenue growth, more efficient and effective marketing search, database development, and customer retention (Morrison et. al, 1999).
However, it changes the relationships between principal and intermediary (Bowie & Buttle, 2004). Intermediaries, who are third parties between principals and final consumers, deliver information and assists purchase (Middleton & Clarke, 2001). Nowadays GDSs is treated as 'traditional eTourism eMediaries' and challenged by new eTourism eMediaries - Web agents (Buhalis, 2003).
Disintermediation and re-intermediation are two issues raised by Internet together with the emergence of ecommerce model (Ma et al., 2003). Disintermediation is the elimination of intermediaries, for example, hotels cut off travel agencies and sell directly to consumers via their own websites. It is believed that ED would replace traditional distribution channels (Buhalis, 1998), especially from its key force - Internet (Inkpen, 1998), traditional travel agencies will disappear and a new kind of organisation will be formed with new products and new business models (Bloch and Segev, 1997). However, O'Connor (1999) argues travel agencies are good at searching and packaging loads of information into valuable advice to customers, so that their role is getting more important. This is a controversial topic with many arguments.
At the same time, new channels are structured on Internet. Since Internet decreases the entrant barriers, new players enter and provide new added-value services, such as new Web travel agent Expedia. To survive, old intermediaries chase the trend and build their website on Internet as well, for example, Travelocity is a portal website of Sabre. In sum, new online assistants are needed for online sellers to reach customers, provide added value and generate revenue, all of these contribute to the phenomena of re-intermediation (Turban & King, 2003).
Some consumers prefer intermediaries, some like buying from principal directly. No matter how the things change, Internet shifts the bargaining power to end users and reduces the switching costs (Porter, 2001); so the ultimate winner is always the consumers (Financial Time, 1998). In the next section, 'the winner' is going to choose some travel products via three Internet distribution channels; and the evaluation of each channel is discussed afterward.
This is a Chinese-American family, who lives in Baltimore Maryland, has been living in Unites States of America for twenty years. The father is a university professor and the mother works in a government department. They have two daughters, 15-year-old and 5-year-old. This family love sports, especially the father and the 15-year-old daughter (Basketball is her favorite). They rarely book anything ahead of time, one reason is because of their busy work, and the other factor is the personal characteristics of father, family decider and buyer.
The motivation for this trip to Disney World is because children wish to go to Disney, especially the little one. Family market is always the core of Theme park industry (Milman, 2001), this family choose Disney World in Orlando rather than Universal is because Disney has a powerful brand image and awareness. Both parents are busy all year around and they have more available time during Christmas. They plan to leave on 20 th December and get back on 26 th. The budget for this trip is about $3000, including flight, hotel, park ticket and car hire. Even though their income is about higher middle class, Chinese tradition tells them try to save if possible.
In this trip, the family needs 4 round trip tickets (economy class) from Baltimore to Orlando, a Disney Resort hotel room for 6 nights, four Disney Park tickets and 6-day car rental. They searched Travelocity , Hotels.com and three principal websites , , and found nearly the same products with different prices (Table 1). They desired day trip plan can be found in Appendix 1.
Package from Hotels.com includes Disney Ultimate Park Hopper Ticket automatically when booking a Disney Resort hotel. However, Travelocity did n't offer this, so customers have to book Disney Park Hopper Plus tickets which provide fewer benefits from principal websites.
The section introduces and reviews important elements involved in distribution channel for further evaluation.
Tapscottal. (2000) classify five basic types for e-business by two dimensions of differentiation: control and value integration. Adapting to travel and tourism industry (Paraskevas, 2004), they are travel aggregator (e.g., Expedia.com), travel marketplace (e.g., Priceline), travel integrator (e.g., Eurovacations), alliance (e.g., opodo.com) and distributive network. This essay will focus on the two channels selected by customer: aggregator - Travelocity and integrator - Hotels.com.
Aggregation benefits customers from goods selection, prices, organisation to provide convenient purchase and fulfill the transaction (Tapscott et al., 2000). 'Selection and convenience' is the main theme of aggregators. Travel aggregators package tourism products according to average travelers' needs to meet large group of customers (Paraskevas, 2004). Travelocity is a web-based travel agency owned and operated by Sabre. It concentrates on selling flight ticket, hotels and car hire and provides information of destination and special offers (Forrester Research Inc, 2001).
Integrator is adapted from 'value chain' of Tapscottal. (2000) typology. The first task of integrator is to identify customers' needs, then design and build product to meet specific customer requirement. Travel integrators design and customize holidays for individual customers, who are driven by value. Hotels.com is a subsidiary of IAC/InterActiveCorp and a leading provider of lodging worldwide. It offers a one-stop shopping source for travelers and reservation (Hotels.com).
On internet, prospective consumers communicate via Web sites and convert interests into action and sales (Morgan et al., 2001); an effective Web site leads to the success of business (Jeong, 2003). Besides, the considerable costs in setup, advertising and maintenance, as well as the fierce Web competitions make Website evaluation necessary (Tierney, 2000). Moreover, analyzing the effectiveness of a site is critical in assessing and revising the strategy to overcome problems (Chaffey et al., 2000).
There are a variety of ways to evaluate website effectiveness. For example, Bell & Tang (1998) set ten factors for evaluation - access to Web-site, content, graphics, structure, user friendliness, navigation, usefulness, unique features, online transactions and site usage fee; Abelsal. (1999) develops user-based design criteria including the six measured elements: use, content, structure, linkage, search and appearance in the order of importance; Wolfinbarger and Gilly (2003) extracts four factors contributing to 'eTail quality', which are fulfillment/reliability, Website design, privacy/security and customer services; Chaffeyal. (2000) consider a '6C' strategy is critical to Website effectiveness, which including capture, content, community, commerce, customer orientation and credibility.
In this case, the user-based design criteria (Appendix 2) are adopted for evaluation. To consider users in web design process is to stand in the position of prospective customers, evaluating Website from consumer perspective enables organisations to approach consumers and satisfy them. Given no method is perfect, some elements in other criteria will also be considered during evaluation.
Branding is the process of developing a recognized name for the goods and services of one seller (Buhalis, 2003). Generally speaking, a successful brand offers buyer or user unique added values that match their needs and keeps it in competition (de Chernatony & McDonald, 1992). It is especially important for services and intangible products. Similarly, Internet brand names, which are substitute for physical facilities for trust building, matter even more. Furthermore, brand recognition is important in building trust (Turban et al., 2004). According to Lendrevie and Levy (1999), one of the four factors that enhance a Website' trust development is 'predictability factor', which includes brand reputation and brand credibility.
Normally, there are three ways to build brand on Internet (Chaffey et al., 2000). The most common one is to use the established brand, such as Air Tran, Hertz. The second way is to partner with existing digital brand e.g., Yahoo! and the third one is to create a brand new digital brand such as Travelocity, Hotels.com.
Transparent pricing is a feature of e-commerce. Focusing on low price, competition is migrated to price on Internet (Porter, 2001). Even though customers realise the fact that there're different prices for the same products online they do n't know where can they find it (Werthner & Klein, 1999). To response, 'Guaranteed Best Rate' is one strategy used by hotels and some intermediaries.
Privacy is an important legal and social issue in the US, where the customers live. On Internet, the protection of privacy is supported by specific legislation such as the Federal Internet Privacy Protection Act, Consumer Empowerment Act (Turban & King, 2003). Privacy policy may vary in different Websites, whilst Privacy Seal is public recognized to guarantee customers, such as BBBOnline Reliability Seal, TRUSTe (Appendix 3).
Besides, security is another principal issue in promoting e-commerce for both buyers and sellers (Chaffey et al., 2001). It has always been a restraint for Internet shopping (Huang, 1998; Kunz, 1997; Weber & Roehl, 1999). Thus, guarantee security is the initial requirement before any commercial activities involving sensitive information take place (Adam et al., 1999). There are eight main elements involved in security issues - authentication, authorization, availability, confidentiality, integrity, nonrepudiation of origin and privacy (Appendix 4). In addition, transaction security is guaranteed by certain technology. The industry standard SSL encryption is always used to protect data from theft during transmission.
Matzler and Pechlaner (2001) emphasized booking process is an important part of service chain, which contributes to service quality. When combined with a successful E-payment procedure with customer preferred features independence, security and ease of use are of (Adam et al., 1999), reservation and purchase can be delivered to consumers effectively.
The next page is results of evaluation and comparison, all the factors and feedbacks are listed in the Table. To sum up the purchase experience from customer 's view, travel agency is the easiest way to book and Hotels.com possibly is the final choice. (To page 13) (Continue page 10) Because customers spend the least time but get the best price. Hotels.com delivered their 'best rate guarantee', which gains customers' trust, so that it is very possible that customers would shop with them again. As a travel aggregator, Travelocity does n't fulfill the value proposition of optimum selection and convenience, especially for the park ticket problem. Besides, there're some other flaws in their vacation package. For example, airlines in 'flight + hotel' package are very limited and customer cannot choose the best one.
Compare with the other two channels, booking with principals is time-consuming. However, consumers cannot get a lower rate if buy directly from them. Disney World is the destination principal, by using differentiated park ticket as a strategy; it attracts customers to book Walt Disney World Resort   Hotels. Apart from packaging hotel and park ticket, Disney also tries to add air and ground transportation into their package. However, it does n't work well at the moment, because searching a flight or car in Disney Website takes such a long time and sometimes ends up with no result (especially for car hire).
Even though website design is satisfactory on average, consumer feels the booking process is too mechanistic and lack of social presence. About security issues, without reminding consumer is not likely to check privacy seal or any security guarantee. Even though terms and conditions are listed before purchase, it is rarely read by consumers.
Regarded as one of the most important and successful distribution channels, Internet enables consumers to search travel products, compare prices, make reservation and purchase (Collins et al., 2003). In the near future, Internet is continuing to be prime channel for travel products and can generate greater services expectation. More consumers will trust Internet and shop online (Buhalis & Licata, 2002). In such a dynamic competitive environment, it is a must for principals and intermediaries to improve themselves, gain competitive advantages and win customers. Referring from customer experience, the essay is going to discuss implications in the following part and recommendations are provided to intermediaries, principals and all organisations at the end.
First of all, customer experiences reveal that brand recognition is a critical factor in selecting channels. As Fox (1998) pointed out, prospective consumers prefer to communicate with established travel web of good reputation. For this reason, branding is an important concern for organisations. In addition, organisations should pay attention to branding strategy as well. It seems most consumers perceive digital names of established 'bricks & mortar' business are their existing traditional brand names, particularly those with more awareness. The failure of Disney 's online portal also shows that creation of a new digital brand should be prudent.
Secondly, being the most common ways to gather personal information, registration is required by most websites (Turban & King, 2003). It is a way to build effective customer relationship, because the more an organisation knows about its consumers, the better it will be able to satisfy them (Middleton and Clarke, 2001).
Thirdly, the customer had no problem during booking and payment; however, organisations cannot assume that all consumers are ok with it. Some consumers do fear Internet and Online purchase. Therefore, the web design must be able to assist new customers (Holt, 2000), such as providing Toll-free number, email links should be place every page. Interactivity of Web site worth noting.
Fourthly, legal and security issues should be stressed from both sides. Even though it is argued that security issues often raise concerns when collect information or pay online (Bonn, Furr & Susskind, 1999), how many customers check the privacy seal or SSL? How many read terms & conditions even though they are told to? So organisations should increase consumers' awareness of  'self-protection'. This would benefit both consumers and organisations.
Finally, besides the criteria used in Table 1 to assess Web site effectiveness, NetMachanic   technical evaluation and LinkPopularity are two tools for organisation. NetMachanic   checks load time, HTML check & repair, browser compatibility, spell and link. Appendix 9 shows the checking result. Generally all the websites can provide good links; but load time, which is the most important factor for websites, is not favourable in this group. The other tool LinkPopularity tells organisation how popular their site is, the result is more helpful when compare with competitor. For example, Travelocity is less popular than its competitor Expedia (Appendix 6).
In the era of Internet, Web site is critical to the success of business (Jeong, 2003), developing and maintaining high-quality Web site should always be staying in agenda of all organisations. Besides easy-use and useful content, consumers also need interactivity. So that interactive helper, high quality photograph, feature comments from previous customers and personal recommendations are suggested by Morgan (2001) for a good Website design. Furthermore, a Web-based community can be built to enhance B2C & C2C communication, trust and social presence (Gefen & Straub, 2003).
Many authors emphasize that understanding consumer behaviour is crucial for both existing and potential business (Fram & Grady, 1995; Lohr, 1999; Law & Leung, 2000; Lohse, et al., 2000). Organisations should make better use of personal information collected from registration in order to strengthening customer relationship and knowing their target audience. Trust is the foundation of successful customer relationship (Papadopoulou et al., 2001) and customer retention (Reichweld & Schefer, 2000), since brand recognition contributes to trust building (Turban et al., 2004) a trustworthy brand image is the best weapon for all organisations.
Meanwhile, Adamal. (2001) suggest trust is also based on security. Considering the previous implications, organisations is better to raise customers' awareness of security issue when purchase (e.g., AirTran) and notify or highlight some important policies (e.g., Travelocity). Needless to say, all of these should be based on a completed and established legal and security system.
To aggregator, a fixed package and price can hardly satisfy customers any more especially when price is not a competitive advantage in Internet era (Porter, 2001). After fulfill its value proposition, aggregator must customize everything includes pricing (Tapscott, 2000). Simply aggregation is hard to meet consumers' need, only adopt customization and flexibility can them compete with other intermediaries. To integrator, since they've already good at customizing travel products to customers, adding value in service, provide  'service-enhanced customer solution' should be their next proposition (Tapscott, 2000). In a word, consumers would prefer personalized, customized and individualized products (Popcorn, 1991), and 'one-stop-shop' of personalized tourism product will be key to success for all intermediaries (Buhalis & Licata, 2002).
Price war is continuing and it 's always the major issues for principals. Intermediaries and many hotel brands' Website offer 'best rate guarantee' to attract gain customers, but seldom destination, car or airline companies do. It is predicted that future theme parks and attractions will offer more value pricing (Milman, 2001), however, a long strategy is not based on pricing. Backup by Disney brand, Resort hotel would not be a commodity product. As aforementioned, brand is the best weapon especially to such a powerful brand as Disney. In addition, their distribution channel can be improved by assisting and cooperating with intermediary (e.g., Travelocity).
At present, Disney attempts to aggregate travel products. 'Add ground/air transportation' is a good idea to 'focus on their core business and let partners do the rest' (Tapscott, 2001), even though it does n't work well at the moment, a proper ICT support can help destination gain competitive advantage by either maintaining price leadership or differentiation (Ma et al., 2003). To small airline and car companies, cooperation or partnership may be a good way.
It is noted that destination principal still needs travel agency, as well as consumers. Facing so many distribution channels, consumers desire more advice and guarantee ever than before (Boyers, 1998); to meet the new demand, traditional travel agencies had better change their role to 'infomediary' and consultant (Morgan et al., 2001; Holjevac, 2003).
When doing business on the Internet, the only assumed constant is change.
In future, distribution models are more complex, multi-dimensional, open and flexible (O'Connor, 2004). 'Faster, better and innovative service' is needed for all organisations (Tapscott, 2000). No matter principals or intermediaries, who can adapt to the dynamic world quickly and flexibly who will be the winner.
