8 alternative proposals are suggested, all are with reference to the Contribution statement, Appendix (2-5).
They are:
Raise the selling price per cover. Assume that there is no change in sales volume, the whole of the price increase are regarded as an additional profit for the business ( Raise the selling price by 5%.
With reference to Appendix 2, the proposed Average Spending Power is   8.40.
The effect of a 5% price increase is to decrease the variable cost percentage from 52.8% to 50.3%.
This results a higher contribution per unit (  4.18) , and requires 58 fewer covers to reach the break-even point.
The new level of net profit,  625, is 81.16% higher than the original figure of   345.
Since the cost of food is high, with the assumption of no change in sales volume, raising the food price helps to cover the cost and obtain a higher contribution. (Raise only food prices by 5%.
With reference to Appendix 2, the proposed ASP is   8.26.
The effect of a 5% increase in food changes the sales mix to 66% food, 33% beverage.
This results a higher contribution per unit (  4.04), and requires 39 fewer covers to reach the break-even point.
The new level of net profit,  527, is 52.75% higher than the original figure of   345.
Since the average spend on beverage is low (  2.8 per cover), raise the beverage price can improve the current profit. It is believed that customers are willing to pay as the change only costs a slight increase. ( Raise only beverage prices by 10% (assume no change in sales volume).
With reference to Appendix 3, the proposed ASP is   8.28.
The effect of a 10% increase in food changes the sales mix to 62.8% food, 37.2% beverage.
This results a higher contribution per unit (  4.06), and requires 42 fewer covers to reach the break-even point.
The new level of net profit,  541, is 56.81% higher than the original figure of   345.
By increasing the gross profit margin, the cost of sales will decrease and the whole of the saving is thus regarded as an additional profit. ( Increase in overall gross profit percentage from 47% to 50%.
With reference to Appendix 3,.
The cost of sales is decreased from 53% to 50%, thus there is an additional profit.  168 (3%).
This results a higher contribution per unit (  4.02), and requires 36 fewer covers to reach the break-even point.
The new level of net profit,  513, is 48.70% higher than the original figure of   345.
It is clearly that the higher level of sales, the more profit will be generated ( Increase all sales volume in the present sales mix by 5%.
With reference to Appendix 4, the ASP is the same (i.e.  8.00).
The effect of a 5% increase in sales volume increases the net profit from 6.2% to 8.1%.
The new level of net profit is  477, which is 38.33% higher than the original figure of   345.
There is a large spend on paying full- time staff. The manager may decide to reduce the permanent labour so to lower the total fixed costs. ( Reduction in permanent labour of   200.
With reference to Appendix 4,.
The reduction in labour costs lowers the fixed cost to   2100,.
This lowers the volume of contribution needed to break even requires 53 fewer covers.
Total cost is   200 less which means a corresponding increase in net profit.
The new level of net profit,  545, is 57.97% higher than the original figure of   345.
The other expenses accounts for a high proportion of the total expenditure (39%). It should reduce it so to obtain a lower figure.
With reference to Appendix 4, ( Decrease the expenditure in other expenses by 20%.
The saving lowers the fixed cost to   2036.
This lowers the volume of contribution needed to break even requires 70 fewer covers.
Total cost is   264 less which means a corresponding increase in net profit.
The new level of net profit,  609, is 76.52% higher than the original figure of   345.
Promotion may raise customer 's awareness; the number of customers is increased and so does the sales volume. ( Launch an advertising campaign.
Assumption- An advertising campaign costing   50 would increase the total sales by 10%.
With reference to Appendix 5,.
It should be noted that as the total fixed costs is increased, the number of covers needed to reach the break-even point is higher, which requires 13 more covers.
However, the new level of net profit,  559.5, is 62.17% higher than the original figure of   345, which is a significant growth.
Besides cost control and financial management, there are several areas that the manager should take into account to improve the wealth of an operation:
This includes the management of relationship with customers and employees.
Customer loyalty is an important determinant of profit.
Benefits of having loyal customers:
To ensure customer loyalty: The service outcome and experience should of a high standard and matches their own needs that satisfies even delights customers.
Satisfaction is the outcome of the consumer 's evaluation of a service. There are four attributes of satisfaction and Dissatisfaction, stated by Cadotte and Turgeon (1988):
I) Hygiene factors: Have a low potential to delight customers, however they need to be in place otherwise it will be a source of dissatisfactions.
Areas include:
II) Enhancing factors: Have a potential to delight if they are present, but are unlikely to dissatisfy customers if they are not in place.
III) Critical factors: Have a high potential that lead to customers delight and dissatisfaction.
Areas include:
IV) Neutral factors: Have little effect on satisfaction.
Areas include:
The operations manager should realize which factors will delight and which will dissatisfy the customers in order to create external service value. Thus customers are retained and provide significant benefits for the restaurant.
In service-operations industry, activities are human-oriented therefore the staff is an important resource in determining organizational effectiveness. The personal nature of restaurant service places emphasis on the importance of direct interaction between employees and customers.
To maintain an effective workforce, this can be done by:
This helps enhancing employees' knowledge and skills to perform their tasks.
With the use of staff/workforce scheduling, it helps to ensure staffing levels are sufficient to meet demand but not exceed it. At the same time, it achieves maximum productivity from each and every member of staff taking into account the need for appropriate staff welfare.
Tasks should be allocated according to employees' capabilities. Besides, it needs to ensure the staff understand their tasks clearly. Development of standards of performance or operating manuals with job description and specifications may play an important role.
Levels of performance are determined not only by the ability of staff but also by the strength of their motivation, which is derived from the fulfilment of an individual 's needs and expectations.
With reference to the Herzberg 's two actor theory, the manager should fulfil the hygiene factors to prevent employee dissatisfaction, alongside with the motivators to create an effective workforce. These include praising employees when they do good work, providing a sense of achievement, increasing the level of responsibility of employees, and taking a proactive view of the organizational climate.
As front- line staff communicate directly with customers, it 's an opportunity for them to take control of those moments of truth that help building customer loyalty.
Therefore, Jones (1994) states that operation manager should empower the workforce by providing specific guidelines with regards to the limits on their decision making; or flexible empowerment, which enables employees to make on-the-spot decisions in order to achieve customer satisfaction.
As roles of staff (i.e. the front-lines employees in the restaurant) are interrelated, the performance of the organization may gain advantages when the employees work as a team:     Complementary skills and experience exceed those of any one individual obtains a more effective response to customer service and high level of customer satisfaction.     The employees work towards a common goal and there is effective communication among them. allows them to respond more flexibly to changing customer needs     Through working in teams, staff build trust in others and in other 's capabilities. maintains en effective service delivery system.
There are several alternatives on the Food & Beverage to gain competitive advantages:     Promote new food items with special offer to attract customers     Create a separate menu for kids. Provide children 's favourite menu with child-size portion at lower prices. This attracts families with children.     As customers become more knowledgeable about nutrition and concern healthy eating, managers might provide the nutritional content of ingredients and menu items.     Furthermore, the restaurant can promote low calories menu items so to attract customers who are on diet and prefer light meals.
To maintain profit growth and to differentiate itself from other competitors, the restaurant should maintain high quality standards. Since quality is consistent performance to customers' expectations, (Slack et al, 1995), an understanding of customer expectations and their perceptions of quality are therefore a very important part of the management.
Benefits of improving and maintaining quality:
To maintain high quality of products, this can be done by:
Quality assurance: Develop processes and procedures which prevent quality mistakes from occurring in the first place.
Since a meal experience involves both tangible (the food and beverage) and intangible products (the whole service delivered to customers from the time they enter the restaurant to their departure), customer will expect to pay for products and services and receive value from both tangibles and intangibles, therefore the operations should maintain delivering a high quality service.
The management of capacity has a great impact on long term success.
If resources are overstretched:     If there is a sudden surge of customers, this increases the waiting time and staff pay less attention on customers' needs strategy: poor service delivery     As the employees are continually overloaded, they will probably make more mistakes poor performance and lower customer satisfaction     High staff turnover as they are demotivated.
Therefore, the manager needs to put focus on capacity management to ensure the service process has sufficient resources to deal with the anticipated levels of customer demand in the most cost-effective manner.
For a restaurant operation, a combination of the three capacity strategies can be employed:
Furthermore, emphasis should put on the management on the "coping" zone as well.
Benefits of marketing:     Understand customer needs and satisfying local tastes.
Offer guidelines when designing the mix of products and services that will satisfy them     Understand the trends in the target market.
Keep improvements on the current business so to prevent lagging behind.     By keeping customer records, helps realizing customers attitudes and purchasing habits, and gaining repeat visits information.
Operators can use these information to improve customer relations and create loyalty     Understand competitors in the market.
By learning from them such as their strengths and weaknesses, pricing policy and quality; manager can make improvements on the current business and create unique selling point to gain competitive advantage.
Therefore, manager should develop a marketing plan and do market research, alongside teaching employees sell suggestively to improve sales.
With the use of the Service-Profit Chain (Heskett et al, 1994), we can conclude the way for the restaurant gains profit growth:
Internal service quality should firstly fulfilled, which includes employee relations, capacity management, control of finance and food & beverage, marketing; this leads to.
