The issue whether recruitment and selection techniques applied in the hospitality and tourism industry are appropriate and effective enough has triggered ongoing discussions. According to Korczynski (2002), in a highly competitive market like this, competitive advantage can often only be achieved by providing excellent service through employees. This should reveal the importance the workforce, and thus logically also recruitment and selection, have to play in hospitality businesses. However, due to the large number of young people being employed as well as factors like low pay, missing career structures and incentives, the industry suffers from a high turnover (ILO, 2001). Firms should not underestimate the high costs involved in staff turnover. A company looses   626 whenever a routine unskilled worker resigns and as much as   5.219 should a manager decide to quit his or her job (CIPD, 2001).
Referring to relevant literature this essay will propose a framework of theoretical aspects which should be taken into account when dealing with the subject. At the same time it will present models of good practise for recruitment and selection. The essay will go on to evaluate if and to what extend these techniques are actually implemented in the industry and whether, by applying these, employee "fit" can be achieved. Finally, reasons why there is room for improvement will be given.
Price (1994) states, the poor image of the hospitality and tourism industry regarding personnel management can only be ameliorated by significantly improving the working conditions and staff guidance in the business. Even though arguably not much factual knowledge is needed to be able to recruit, it can be a lot more efficient if some theory is applied (Goldsmith, Nickson, Sloan, Wood, 1997). Goldsmithal. (1997) declare the dual labour market theory, which splits the labour market into two distinctive groups, as an important topic when dealing with recruitment and selection. While the primary labour market, among other things, stands for continuity, safety, opportunities, high profitability, high wages and high skills, the secondary labour market is basically the opposite. It comprises instability, high fluctuation, low profitability, low wages and low skills, which is why Goldsmith et al. (ibid.) suggest a similarity to employees' and employers' attitudes in the hospitality industry. These characteristics of the market might also be a reason for the abovementioned high turnover in the industry.
Gold (2003) states that organisations should have a strategic plan in place which can be used as a guideline throughout the recruitment process and beyond. At the beginning of this process stands the decision if the vacated job needs to be replaced at all (Newell and Shackleton, 2001). Often tasks can be shifted and done by existing staff whose competencies would accordingly be expanded. Nevertheless, should management identify the necessity for a replacement employee, the next step would be to develop a job description that clearly defines required skills and qualities that need to be possessed (Mullins, 2001; Newell and Shackleton, 2001). Still this position could be filled with a person already employed at the company which has been described as recruiting from the internal labour market (Heraty and Morley, 1998). Consequently the opposite would be employing a new applicant from outside; thus the external labour market. Recruiting from the internal market is preferable as, among other aspects, it safes costs for advertising or training the new employee. According to McGunnigle and Jameson (2000, p 406) "recruitment and selection is frequently identified as essential in achieving culture change and employee commitment" within the referable literature. By carefully selecting and employing a candidate who appears to fulfil the company 's requirements, a manager can influence the existing culture in the organisation and thus also affect staff commitment. Both could enhance the working environment and lead to less turnover, thus breaking the existing vicious cycle described by Goldsmithal. (1997).
An employee who is able to resemble and represent attributes, opinions and values of a company in a perfect way, could be described as the best fit (Heraty and Morley, 1998). When looking for the optimal recruitment and selection method, managers could differentiate between the objective of hiring an employee for a key position or simply engaging someone for a low skilled job (Mullins, 2001). Torrington, Hall and Taylor (2002) agree, and add, to attract candidates, companies have to decide between a number of recruitment methods like advertisements (local or national), job centres, head-hunters or the internet. Which technique or techniques to choose depends on who is to be attracted from which labour market, but also on arising expenses involved. The more precise the information given, the more suitable recruits will be attracted. One of the problems managers face when recruiting and selecting is how to determine if an employee has the sought-after qualities or whether he or she is pretending (Ferris and King, 1991). A simple, informal interview generally does not provide enough insight. Literature suggests more formal recruitment and selection techniques in order to gain more accurate information about the applicant. According to Gold (2003, p 234) selection methods should be able to "measure" differences and "predict" performance of the candidate. He also points out the importance of reliability; for example having two interviews with two different interviewers, and validity; being assessed against designed objectives, of selection techniques which enhance the more sophisticated techniques compared to the informal practices. Structuring an interview, for example asking the same questions to all candidates (Newell and Shackleton, 2001), can make it more effective and valid as a greater variety of topics are likely to be covered and answers of the different applicants can be compared. It is necessary however to possess a certain level of knowledge on the subject, to be able to apply these methods. Psychometric examinations, which can be divided into ability tests and inventories, have been an increasingly successful tool in the last decade (Gold, 2003). To accomplish even higher predictability of performances by potential future employees, companies can organise assessment centres. These take place over one or more days using many of the above mentioned practices but also adding group activities and role plays (ibid., 2003). Obviously assessment centres take a considerable amount of time and money as well as labour such as skilled assessors. In any case managers, even though holding more power than the applicant, need to recognise that the recruitment and selection process should lead to a mutual agreement as both parties have certain interests which have to be considered (Lucas, 2004). Finally, Newell and Shackleton (2001) point out the importance of evaluating the performance of the new employee after some time to understand if the applied recruitment and selection techniques were effective.
However, reality and the over reliance on the interview are somewhat different from what is suggested in theory. According to Price (1994) applied recruitment and selection practises still lack formality and regulation and clearly differ from what is seen as good practise by the theorists. Price (ibid.) discovered a connection between the size of a company and the degree of implemented guidelines for recruitment and selection; larger companies displace the smaller ones to a considerable degree. With the majority of businesses in the industry being small ones, an appliance of good practise of recruitment and selection models seems very difficult. A significant number of companies ignore composing a "job description" and "person specification" and apply word of mouth as favourite technique for recruiting low skilled and casual staff which confirms the assumption of informal practises being widespread in the industry (ibid., p50). Many small businesses disregard legal commitments and often lack sufficient use of contracts to back up their promises to staff (ibid., 1994). One of the problems these enterprises usually face is that managers often do not possess the relevant knowledge to successfully apply complicated recruitment and selection methods and, moreover, usually lack the money that would have to be invested in more formal procedures (Jameson, 1999). Another example is the internal labour market not being utilised to its full potential. Instead of promoting staff, managers continue to recruit from the external labour market and are therewith missing a lot of opportunities. Finally, dismissals are common practise in the industry and managers actually think high turnover is inevitable (Goldsmith et al, 1997).
As the International Labour Organisation (ILO, 2001, p 55) state, one of the reasons for constant high turnover is the "transient nature or part of the workforce" which leads to a continuous recruiting and selecting; a vicious circle. Businesses, especially small ones, have to be convinced that through improving their selection and recruitment methods and thus improving the culture of the work environment, this circle can be broken. It has to be demonstrated that more money is lost by working with informal methods than by investing in better techniques suggested within the literature. Small companies with low budgets could start improvement by using one of the cheaper methods like the abovementioned two interviews per candidate by two different people which would already enhance reliability. Employees are the "human assets" of hospitality businesses. In today 's highly competitive market their true value and consequently the importance of choosing the right employees should be acknowledged. If the hospitality industry, especially the small companies who tend to fall short of good recruitment and selection practises, continues to disregard suggestions made by theorists, movement towards achieving employee fit will not be possible. Even though sophisticated methods might be seen as too costly and unnecessary by some managers, the overall benefits explained above would suggest adopting some of the techniques described to improve quality of staff and thus service and competitive advantage.
