As already sketched by the title, Joy Hendry 's work Wrapping Culture: politeness, presentation, and power in Japan and other societies leads a discourse about one of the themes that reappears in the Japanese society on various levels - the concept of wrapping and more importantly about the 'intercultural communication and the possibilities for misinterpretation of familiar objects in an unfamiliar context.'(Hendry,1993,pp.2) Due to the limited scope of this review, the following paragraphs will briefly summarize the main issues and arguments about the element of wrapping in material as well as linguistic context and further comment on the value of this ethnography, as well as its contribution to the study of the Japanese culture. Where possible, further comparisons with the Western model will illustrate the similarities and differences between Japanese and occidental societies.
The ethnography is organized into eight sections each focusing on a different level of the concept of wrapping. Starting from the more material perspective, the analysis gradually moves towards symbolic and abstract 'layers' of discourse. The first chapter dealing with the general purpose and meaning of wrapping thus sets the basis for further development of this multi-layered symbolism. It is therefore important at this point to take notice of several facts: A gift expresses different things about the relationship between people. The attitude towards wrapping may have a great significance because it reveals a major difference between the Westerns and the Japanese. (Hendry,1993,pp.13) While the focus of the former is on the object inside, for the Japanese the wrapping itself may be of far greater significance than the actual object being wrapped.
Matinez, D.P. (1998) The Worlds of Japanese popular culture: Gender, shifting boundaries and global cultures. As Martinez points out, true nature of anthropology, whether from structuralist or postmodernist perspective, is to observe and study 'the interaction between the apparently separate realms of the material and the symbolic'; 'materials produced by a society are also capable of having symbolic value' and this is what is clearly the focus of Joy Hendry 's work, too.
Hendry, Joy (1993). Westerners regard wrapping as a means to obscure the object, while Japanese perceive it a means of refinement - adding layers of meaning, which it could not carry in its unwrapped form. pp. 27. In Japanese gift-giving, unlike Western, the element of surprise hardly figures; it is often more important to chose an object of an appropriate value, and the main thing is to recognize the fact that the gift has been presented in a certain way, appropriate for the status (i.e. elaborately wrapped for a person of formal relationship, unwrapped as for offerings to the deceased, or minimally wrapped in a cellophane for an intimate friend) appropriate to the occasion (i.e. welcoming of the New Year, when presents represent the continuation of the relationship rather than true affection), with the appropriate words (i.e.yoroshiku onegaishimasu when welcoming new neighbours while presenting a minimally wrapped towel) etc. pp.8-26.
It is easy to notice, that the significance of status and reciprocity, discussed in the lectures (Sadgwick,2005), plays a key role in this context. First of all, it is unthinkable for a Japanese to stop the habit of exchanging presents once it has been established, as this would send a clearly negative signal about the relationship. (Janos,1998,pp.40) To compare this with the Western attitude in such a situation, one might feel slightly disappointed at nonappearance of an expected present, but perhaps the impact of such an occasion, if explained would not be so grave (despite or maybe even because of Hendry 's point that the focus is on the object, not so much the event in the West).(Hendry,1993,pp.13).
Hendry, Joy (1993). As Hendry points out, although gifts are in theory voluntary, they are often subject to strict bonds of obligation, pp.23.
The status, age, and gender of the parties involved, as discussed by Hendry in chapters 2,3,8, would certainly be other important determinants of the style in which the presentation would be made. Moving to a more abstract 'layer' of analysis, Hendry recognizes the significance of keigo as a means of wrapping - both of the gift which must be presented using specific words at different occasions, and of true intentions which are to be properly wrapped in keigo, taking an appropriate form depending on status, age, gender...(Hendry,1993,pp.53-58) Thus one can see, that in this respect, Japanese society is classed by clear boundaries based on these and many other aspects. It is true to say, however, that even in some western societies, like French, or Slovak, distinct grammatical forms are used to distinguish the status and age of the speakers. in the olden Slovak language, one had to distinguish grammatically between three age categories: lower or same as the speaker 's status would be addressed as 'ty' (you), slightly older (i.e. addressing one 's mother) would use 'vy' (= equivalent of French vous), and the oldest or highest in status would be addressed as 'oni' (= they) and would be addressed in the third person of plural implying a great psychological distance between the speakers.
An interesting feature of wrapping words is sketched here. Not only does the use of keigo represent a way to conceal the negative aspects of what is to be said and thus expresses care for the addressee, but it can also act as means to segregate classes of skillful and less skillful users, obviously giving the former ones an upper hand. As Hendry mentioned, the mechanism of suddenly raising the level of keigo as a means to discourage unwanted advances, or the "polite rudeness" can find parallels in the Western world, though not quiet matching the Japanese version.(Hendry,1993,pp.56) In fact, there is a nice saying in Slovakia, which states that ''the way diplomacy works is by use of language that will not only send the unwanted advancer 'to hell', but it will even make him look forward to it''. This would however not work under all circumstances, because as pointed out in lectures, stress on logic and explicitness in Western culture would most probably obstruct a person getting away with much of the abstract demagogy embodied in such wrapping of words (Sadgwick,2005). It is thus easy to deduce that when a Westerner encounters a Japanese person, misunderstandings are more than likely to occur.(Janos,1998,pp.34-37) Referring back to the idea of 'upper hand', it is possible to argue that one can find similarities in the Bernstein 's theories applied in West.
Hendry, Joy (1993). Keigo, just as the elaborate wrapping of gifts, can be a sign of refinement; it can also be described as a kind of armour, to wrap up and protect the nerves which may be lurking underneath, thus also protect the one who is a potential target of one 's anger, and finally to put some deflecting distance between oneself and a threatening world which one may encounter 'out there'. Just as too formal gifts create a distance between the giver and receiver, the exaggerated use of keigo serves as an effective barrier from strangers, pp.62-63 Furthermore, skilful use of keigo may be seen as to define people as members of a type of elite. Those who are polite are able to operate in a formal context, to deal with wrapping in its various forms. pp. 159-161.
Fulcher J. and Scott J. (2003). According to Bernstein 's language theory, the distinction between 'restricted' and 'elaborated' codes of communication determine the pupils' s academic performance and subsequently his social class, greatly contributing to the class reproduction of the society.
The account of female wrapping of speech presents yet another evidence of the strong divisions within the Japanese society and this book is a useful ethnography acknowledging this element: Because women are socialized into being polite and feminine in their language, the 'possibility of being assertive is radically reduced; women are more polite because they are less secure about their positions than men and language becomes more important for establishment and maintenance of their status.'(Hendry,1993,pp.157) On the other hand mastering of keigo also gives them the power to impress, influence and manipulate.(Hendry,1993,pp.157) To put this into perspective, in West much emphasis is being put on the egalitarianism of men and women and assertiveness is certainly a feature that is not necessarily male any more and thus there is a significant difference between the West and Japan, although in Japan, too, much change is taking place in this context.(Lebra T.S. and Lebra W.P.,1996) In either way, from day-to-day observations, it is possible to say, that in West, too, women tend to be very powerful with their use of manipulative linguistic skills. When it comes to minor traffic infringements, for example, women may be relatively more successful to talk themselves out of potential fines than men. The proportionality of men and women in important government positions is in the process of being institutionalized (European Court of Justice).
The other aspects that were discussed by the book, but which were not touched upon in this review dealt with further layers of the 'wrapping symbolism' - the wrapping of body, space, social and temporal wrapping. But as we have seen, for the main demonstration of the concept, and more particularly the interaction between the material and symbolic 'layers', which is foremost for Hendry 's book, gift wrapping and linguistic packaging are sufficient examples. We have observed how the book skillfully accounts for the differences emerging not only on the intra-cultural but also inter-cultural level. This ethnography thus clearly shows that Japanese society cannot be considered as a homogenous body, but rather as one constantly separated by divisions based on status, age, gender, class etc. Comparisons were made with the Western culture, but differences, too, are present, providing anthropologists and sociologists with many questions about inter-cultural understanding and communication.
