Diversity management has become more important in recent years since the workforce is growing more diverse. This essay will discuss if managing diversity effectively and upholding individual rights has a positive impact on hospitality and tourism organisations. In the beginning it will look at the workforce in the industry and explain Equal Opportunities and Diversity Management. It will then discuss the claimed benefits of Diversity Management and bring forward arguments for and against applying it. Finally it will draw conclusions for the future of diversity management.
According to Cassell (2001) the composition of the workforce in the hospitality and tourism industry in the UK is constantly changing. In recent years there has been an increase of women, workers of ethnic minorities and young workers (International Labour Organisation, 2001, Torrington et al., 2002; Burrell et al., 1997; Kandola and Fullerton, 1998). To prevent unfair treatment against members of these and other minorities in the workforces, the last few decades have seen an increase in legislations against discrimination. These rank from the Equal Pay Act in 1970 to the recent update of the Disability Discrimination Act in 2004. As Maxwell et. al (2000) explain, these acts build the foundation for Equal Opportunities (EO). According to Goldsmithal. (1997) the acts are "an attempt to force employers to guarantee equality of opportunity and freedom from discrimination and harassment" (Goldsmith et. al, 1997: p 50). However, as Groeschl and Doherty (1999) point out, the EO approach has their main focus on groups that are believed to be less advantaged. Although it protects the rights of the groups in the workforce, the individual as such is not considered.
In the beginning of the 1990 's a new approach was started, due to the ever increasing diversity of the workforce (Groeschl and Doherty, 1999): the so called Diversity Management (DM) approach. In comparison to EO the DM approach "has individuals at its centre" (Ross and Schneider, 1992 cited in Maxwell, 2000). The main believe, as Kandola and Fullerton (1998) explain, is that everyone is different and that those differences can be valuable assets to an organisation and therefore should be harnessed. They go on to say that DM is about people "maximising their potential and their contribution to the organisation" (Kandola and Fullerton, 1998: p 9), in comparison to the EO approach which mainly has the prevention of discrimination in mind. One of the main differences between EO and DM, as Torrington et. al (2002) as well as Kandola and Fullerton (1998) point out, is that DM is a strategy which the whole organisation needs to obey to. It is not only the responsibility of the HR department but of every manager and staff member in the business. "Without proper and total commitment from the very top of the company, no diversity policy is ever going to be successful" (Doyle, 2001).
At the basis of the DM approach lays the so called business case. As Cassell (2001) explains, "a business case sees achieving equality as essential to achieving organisational goals" (Cassel, 2001: p 407). As the main business goal normally is to achieve profit, anything to lessen that profit, such as potentially expensive law suits filed by employees who feel treated unfairly (Lemons and Jones, 1999), need to be avoided. Cassell (2001) therefore states that not valuing the differences of employees can be very expensive for an organisation. Yet, as Torrington et. al (2002) point out, DM is not only interesting for the employer. Since it involves everyone in the company, it is also attractive for the employee. At the time of recruitment the employer will have the choice of a bigger selection of skilled applicants. Once working, it is argued that the employees will feel that their rights are respected and therefore will be more motivated and less likely to leave (McEnrue, 1993 in Kandola and Fullerton, 1998; Torrington et. al, 2002). Also it is claimed that through DM, the organisation will improve creativity, be more flexible and also project a better image to the public (Maxwell et. al, 2000; Groeschl and Doherty, 1999). Lastly Doyle (2001) as well as Torrington et. al (2002) claim that there will be better customer service if the diverse workforce "reflects the diverse customer base" (Torrington et. al, 2002: p 370). This can be especially interesting for hospitality and tourism organisations, which are known to have customers from all over the world, including many minorities.
However, Kandola and Fullerton (1998) point out, that it is hard to prove that many of these claimed benefits are actually related to DM. They therefore distinguish between proven, debatable and indirect benefits. For them the only proven benefits are the attraction of a bigger variety of employees, the retention and therefore the cost saved in turnover. The improved quality and better customer service are debatable, as it can not be proven that they are directly linked to DM. The last set of benefits, the indirect ones, can only be achieved if both the proven as well as the debatable benefits are achieved (Kandola and Fullerton, 1998). These include, amongst other, higher motivation, more job satisfaction and a better image of the company. Kandola and Fullerton (1998) explain that evidence has yet to be collected to show the relationship between these factors and DM.
Beside the lack of proof of relationship between DM and the claimed benefits, there are also some other criticisms of DM brought forward in the literature. The first one is that DM is heavily leaned on the business case. According to Cassell (2001) this does not pose a problem as long as the business feels that it is benefiting from employing DM. However, once the economic climate changes, and the organisation does not see any benefits in promoting the individuals right, it might loose interest. This is crucial, since, as Torrington et. al (2002) and Groeschl and Doherty (1999) point out, the benefits of DM will not be seen in just a short period of time, but more likely after a long time of managing the diverse workforce effectively.
The next point criticised is the argument that DM is practised to improve the customer service. It is easy to say that a guest from an ethnic minority would prefer to be served by someone from the same group. Yet Cassell (2001) asks if the same applies for a disabled person. Would that person automatically prefer to be served by a disabled employee? Cassell (2001) goes on to explain that the business case can also work the other way around: if the guests prefer the contact to one type of employee, e.g. in a hotel a female, blonde receptionist, should the only applications considered in the future be of blonde females? He argues that this again would be discrimination and therefore the rights of the employees would not be respected. Also, as Torrington et. al (2002) state, not every employee has direct contact with the customers. Therefore the DM approach would not apply to every job, if improved image and customer service are its main objectives.
The last argument brought forward in the literature is that when practising DM, there might be too much attention on the individual. Wilson (1996) and Liff (1997) [cited in Maxwell, 2000] point out that it might be a mistake to not pay any attention to the possible needs of the "traditional EO groups" (Maxwell, 2000). Torrington et. al (2002) also state that employees might feel uncomfortable to be singled out and would prefer to be seen as part of one group.
As can be seen from the arguments above there are many points that are for, but also many that are against DM. However, with an ever increasing diverse workforce as well as a diverse customer base, especially in the hospitality and tourism industry, the fact that some approach must be taken can no longer be ignored. Even though not all of the claimed benefits can be directly linked to managing diversity, there are still some that definitely can be, such as the cost saved through a lower turnover rate and the avoidance of expensive law suits because of discrimination. The lack of evidence of the benefits could also spring from the fact that DM is a relatively new approach and therefore the relationship could not be proven yet. However, as explained, organisations need to realise that DM is a long-term process and therefore must accept that they have to invest time to be able to see the benefits after a while. For DM to work properly, it is also essential that it is clear that DM is not something only concerned with the HR department but with everyone. The top management as well as every employee needs to believe in and promote it for it to function well.
The DM approach is the next step from EO. By avoiding discrimination of minorities but at the same time looking out for the needs of every individual, no one will be excluded in the future, and the organisations as well as the employees should benefit.
