Wilkinson; a London based Publisher purchased Hoopoe publishing in May 2004 for   0.75 million. As a result of the acquisition questions have arisen regarding its integration into Wilkinson 's current organisational structure which will also inevitably affect the businesses culture, motivation strategies and management of change. They also need to consider the necessity of relocation.
The acquisition of Hoopoe will combine the resources of the two businesses to create an entirely new business. If the merger is to make economic sense for Wilkinson then according to Atrill "the present value of the combined businesses should equal the present value of the future cash flow of both business 's plus a gain from the merger".
Hoopoe currently have a healthy and well established mix of products each varying in the amount of success they've achieved so far as well as the amount of market share and market growth that they all acquire. Presenting Hoopoe 's current products on a 2 dimensional scale representing industry growth and industry share then a corporate portfolio of the products success can be analysed.
If the current products of Hoopoe are applied to the Boston matrix it creates a visual aspect as to which products Wilkinson would like to develop.
The Online Revenues currently have a high margin and strong growth potential. They are classified as a typical 'Star' in relation to the Boston matrix because they are creating revenue and also have the potential for further expansion. The sales to customer facing companies such as AOL and Tiscalli will need further investment as these distribution channels are internet based. With investment in a strong growing area such as the internet there is good future opportunity. As the industry matures less investment will be required and it will transform into a useful cash cow if successful. The product has been placed towards the bottom of the  'star square' as the growth potential is high and will continue, but it is also to the left as the market share is currently strong with a high margin in the market.
When analysing the success of the Print products it seems a good area for development due to good growth prospects and opportunity in thus market. Naylor states that 'Money from the 'cash cows' provides investment' into the product. The products are placed to the far left of the 'question mark square' because they already have a good market share in the UK market however they are not a star because they still have potential to expand in the US which is not certain to be a success.
The 'cash cow' in Hoopoe 's portfolio is the market leading Children 's Encyclopedia. This requires very low investment and is an established product that has succeeded to its fullest potential. As long as Wilkinson takes the option of keeping the Hoopoe brand then it will provide surplus cash for the other products as it ages. However, it may require some investment if a competitor were to challenge the brand. The product is placed to the left of the square as the share is at its highest but towards the bottom as an established product growth is low.
The final product for Hoopoe is a 'Dog' which are the CD-ROM'S, this is due to the recent increase in online products creating less demand for CD Rom 's. If Wilkinson is prepared to then they 'could create a retrenchment policy and cut all of their losses with these products to cease the sales' (Naylor, (1999). However, there is still an indication that if investment is added in the correct way with diversification into the educational market then expansion may again be possible.
Hoopoe has a very strong mix of products some with more potential than others. This is healthy for a business and from a financial point of view there is a balance within the organisation. The 'cash cow' can create revenue for investment in the stars but also a return surplus for the businesses shareholders.
The use of the matrix suggests the opportunities that will arise if Wilkinson decides to merge both companies' portfolios. If the combined two have too many dogs and question marks then the cash cows may fail to be enough investment to cover them all. However, it would suggest from Hoopoe 's range of products.
The option that Wilkinson needs to consider is whether or not to keep the Hoopoe brand as a separate entity from Wilkinson. By doing this they will be following the strategy that Pearson took with Dorling Kindersley. If Wilkinson chooses this option then the market leading product that Hoopoe own; the Children 's Encyclopedia will remain branded in the way it is now, which is important from a recognition point of view. When Wilkinson paid for Hoopoe they also paid for its 'Goodwill' although not a tangible asset they have paid for the right to use the established brand that consumers have become loyal to. 'By purchasing an existing business the necessary specialist managerial and technical 'know how' is already acquired' (Atrill, 2003).
When John Murray, a small independent publisher (similar to Hoopoe) was acquired by Hodder Headline Murray 's prize-winning educational list retained as a John Murray imprint within Hodder. They retained its identity and became a  'separate autonomous division'. Employees of John Murray stated they were saddened over 'loosing their independence'. It also meant the established list was well known by consumers. (ProQuest, The Guardian, May 11 th 2002).
Wilkinson 's other option is to apply all of Hoopoe 's assets and merge them into the Wilkinson brand name. This will involve full integration and simply put to use the skills and knowledge of Hoopoe and adapt accordingly. This however is more likely to be damaging as creating successful large scale integration of this kind disrupts the organizational structure as well as its culture. It will also mean unfavourable redundancies with duplication of the similarly skilled staff and relocation from the Oxford and Aylesbury branches. This as a result will cause problems for employees affecting the culture of the two businesses as this disruption similarly occurred with Taylor & Francis' acquisition when the employees anticipated expiry of their office 's lease in London. The staff at Taylor & Francis were 'left reeling after they learned of a move to Abingdon, Oxford' after the merger with Informa Group. Some staff were offered redundancy packages or relocation but staff were not expected to relocate as they complained 'why would you change your whole lifestyle, when there is no guarantee of a job in a years time?'(The Bookseller, 3/5/2004 Issue 5118). Therefore with evidence of failed integration of this kind Wilkinson will risk loosing employees.
However, there is the possibility of integration problems following a successful bid. There is likely to be a shift in the organisational structure as with any expanding business especially with more staff a larger business needs a successful structure that all employees are aware of. Also with mergers there will be an increase in management which may clash and rivalries may occur especially when the culture of the business 's vary. Culture is a very important aspect for Wilkinson to consider. Evidence shows that 'less formal working practises are favoured by staff and are more likely to lead to extreme satisfaction' (Herzberg, cited in Handy 1993).
Hoopoe 's profit and loss account shows that the gross profit is at its highest. Their turnover and sales have increased whilst their expenses and cost of sales decreased which is a good indication that investment is getting a return which is also indicated by the operating profit. This deducts expenses from the gross profit and "gives a useful comparison for trading performance irrespective of what financing structure is in place" (Atrill, 2003).Although the operating profit is minus it has increased since 2002-3 whilst the expenses have decreased and will continue to do so as the need for marketing lessens, again suggesting that investments have been made in 2002-3.
The gross profit margin also indicates that they are doing better than before as for the years 2001-2 and 2002-3 it was 50% and has subsequently strengthened to 55.5% in 2003-4. Wilkinson also needs to take into account Hoopoe 's fixed and current assets as well as any liabilities. The fixed assets including the goodwill are   0.7m and the current assets value at   0.6m equalling assets of   1.3 m. However, they also have creditors debts of (0.8) giving a total of 0.5m. With fixed and current assets Hoopoe have the ability to pay their creditors however they also still only have an operating profit of (1m).
Nevertheless their operating profit margin although decreased in 2003-4 from the original (7.14) % in 2001-2 to (37.1) % but has gained since a drop to (68.18)% since 2002-3. This shows a weakened margin that is beginning to come back. The future implications of this may result in the operating profit gradually increasing. This assumption can be made because very low operating profit in 2002-3 is likely to have been due to high overheads indicating investment into a product. A decline in operating margin from 13.1% to 11.4% after the merger of Stanley Thornes and Thomas Nelson was also due to investment in electronic and online skills similarly to Hoopoe. However, this developing in electronic skills following 'the launch of the governments curriculum online' was considered 'worth the risk' for them as the   3.6m they paid when acquiring Moorhouse Black whose sales were   1.7m in 2001 (  1.1 m less than Hoopoe 's) represented 2.1 times more their sales. (The Bookseller, 11/15/2002, issue 5052). This is strong evidence that Wilkinson has paid a very good price for the electronic and online skills they are acquiring through the purchase of Hoopoe.
The low operating profit may also increase of Wilkinson take the option of 'paying off' Hoopoe 's creditors as debt within a company can also prevent a good operating result.
When Wilkinson paid   0.75m for Hoopoe they would have needed to take into consideration that their operating profit for the year 2003-4 is (1m) but they also have a number of assets and minus their creditors still totals at   0.5m. They must consider that although Hoopoe is not currently making a profit they are doing well they are beginning to be more successful.
The integration of the two businesses is likely to cause uncertainty amongst the Hoopoe staff for a number of reasons. They are most likely to be resistant to the change due to the fear of unknown, the break in their routine and reduced control that they would have been used to within a smaller organisation.
With regards to change in management they are likely to feel that redundancy could be an option for them. This is likely if Wilkinson adopt Carlton Books' strategy as they chose to reduce their staff by 10 within an office of 60 (a figure similar to Hoopoe 's 40 employees). The redundancies were also a result of the integration with the publisher Prion. (The Bookseller, 8/29/2003, Issue 5092).
As the organisation takes a new additional direction it will result in changes in Hoopoe 's staff roles, changes in the conditions of their employment as well as a change in culture and social attitudes. The reorganisation will result in less social contact between staff at all levels and less opportunity for co-operation between management and staff causing a decrease in the motivation. Wilkinson may find that they can achieve the highest motivation by integrating employees into teams as this 'produces productivity and quality and has motivational issues such as job enrichment, job satisfaction and commitment' (Handy, 1993). With new groups there is the opportunity to have bonding exercises that will create a good social culture encouraging Hoopoe 's staff to feel more integrated into the business. However, they must also consider the freelance employees within Hoopoe as motivation is difficult to achieve as they less involved in the companies strategy.
The staff can be resistant to the change if they perceive the merger as unnecessary or if they do not have sufficient information about the reasoning behind the change. The successful management of change is an increasingly important managerial responsibility and new ideas and innovations should n't be perceived as threats by Hoopoe staff, to minimise this communication is key as well as creating an environment of trust and shared commitment and involving all staff in decisions which affect them is very important.
However, management must be aware that change impacts each person differently and must consider the individual nature of change.
The Hawthorne studies showed that membership of a group is important to most individuals as satisfaction comes from teamwork with a shared sense of responsibility. However, with the merger the group size will be large therefore there is greater diversity for talent skills and knowledge but it this particular case it may mean that there is an overload of people with the same skills and according to Handy 'larger organisations are seen by their members as offering more potential and being more friendly places'.
Teams work best within a democratic culture, the individuals must be co-ordinated and their skills and abilities matched and merged. The new employees need to be satisfied in a group and value membership. When new employees join as members of a new team they will wonder 'Who am I in this group? What is my occupational role here? What are the role expectations of me? What 's the influence pattern and who has the power?' (Handy,1993) Therefore Wilkinson 's management must address theses questions.
According to Handy a change such as this will affect their psychological contract and cause dissonance. If Wilkinson adopt a more flexible working structure then they will allow Hoopoe 's staff more responsibility. However, this demands a strong culture and heavy socialisation in order to achieve motivation. According to Herzberg 's Hygiene factors the satisfiers and dissatisfies need to be correct and in place before the employees can be motivated. 'The hygiene factors are in place in order to prevent dissatisfaction and allow motivation to lead to job satisfaction, job security and good working conditions' (Handy, 1993).
The expectancy theory by Vroom (1964) suggests that the strength of motivation will depend on Hoopoes' staffs new expectations of work outcomes and rewards. A high level of feedback from the managers will bring high confidence and friendly attitudes and inevitably resulting in feeling better motivated.
According to Mullins 'HR is clearly the most important asset of any organisation and a resource that needs to be managed well'. With the merger of the two companies there will no longer be an effective organisational structure, therefore will need to be changed to fit the new employees with new recognition of their needs and expectations. There will be the need for a new staffing structure with the appropriate new people. As HRM is involved in recruitment, selection and induction with the takeover they may feel that they need to make some redundancies as it maybe that there are too many employees in one particular area. However with the diversification into electronic publishing they may feel that it that training of the current Wilkinson staff is more appropriate. 'Training will improve knowledge, skills and change attitudes which is one of the most important motivators' (Mullins, 2002).
HR also has a very important social responsibility .Staff are a crucial but expensive resource Mullins states that 'In Order to sustain economic an effective performance it is important to optimise the contribution of employees to the aims and goals of the organisation'.
Performance appraisal is also very important as it will review the performance of both Wilkinson and Hoopoe staff. However through this system members of the organisation need to know exactly what is expected of them and then potential problems can be identified, it establishes the system and addresses any questions. 'Above all, the importance of HRM practises in creating and reinforcing the corporate culture need to be recognised in order to assure that desired changes in structures and strategies can be implements' (Schneider and Barsaux cited in Mullins).
After evaluating the acquisition of Hoopoe by Wilkinson it is clear that there are a number of financial and human resources issues to tackle. They have options that they must consider regarding Hoopoe 's products and its employees.
The optimum for Wilkinson is to see that the objectives and purposes of the individual, the group and the organisation all coincide and to achieve the correct balance.
Wilkinson is making a good investment through the acquisition especially with the expansion of electronic products which is what Wilkinson wanted to diversify into. Hoopoe 's databases are already coded print products and have the ability to branch into electronic publishing. With expansion and investment this is a good opportunity for Wilkinson and is likely to prove successful.
With the combined resources of both companies they can work together to eliminate competition which will lead to quicker exploitation of the strengths and weaknesses of each business.
