This report will detail the marketing activities of:
The product is an adult paperback re-launch of a short-story collection originally published in hardback by Bloomsbury (January 5, 2004). It contains a novella and four other pieces of fiction by established author and journalist, Will Self. Three of the stories were commissioned for other purposes before inclusion in the work, while the other two, including the title piece, were written with the collection in mind. Each story is visceral, dark and urban, dealing with the theme of psychosis or 'mind games'. They all have a narrative peppered with absurd premises, and for this reason they are characteristic of the innovative and satirical style that Self is famed for.
The book adheres to some general conventions in adult trade paperback fiction. It is a B format standard size with perfect binding. Also, its   7.99 price point reflects the typical recommended retail price across this sector of publishing.
Throughout this report I will refer to and make comparisons with the hardback campaign where appropriate.
Dr. Mukti and Other Tales of Woe, both the hardback and paperback, is very generically targeted at the adult reader, and perhaps more the male adult reader. It also seems likely to be aimed largely at frequent book-buyers. That is, Self 's sophisticated treatment of language, as well as the dark subject area, make the title less likely to appeal to impulse buyers than other trade books. It is somewhat highbrow, attractive to more literary-aware rather than mass-market consumers.
Specifically, I can identify three types of segmentation used by Penguin to reach their target consumer for this title:
Paperback Segmentation: Cheaper, more practical paperback editions appeal to a lot more people. With this title, Penguin are likely to attract those consumers who were interested in the product as a hardback but refused to pay its higher price. (Bloomsbury 's segment was quite opposite, of course, because the hardback book was likely to have been bought by avid fans of Self 's work, who felt the format and   15.99 price tag distinguished them as appreciators of high-quality products.).
Behavioural Segmentation: Fans of the author, or indeed readers who have enjoyed one of his previous books, are extremely likely to make a response purchase on recognising this title (Blythe, 2001). This will largely be the case despite what, if anything, they have heard regarding its quality. As an established writer, Self has a definite following that the publishers can hope will be loyal to him.
Psychological Segmentation:Dr. Mukti and Other Tales of Woe, like all books, is aimed at certain personalities. Its collection of stories fits with those readers who prefer fiction to be shorter and less dense, for example. Also, it importantly fulfills some definable needs and wants in consumers. The famous author and his perceived innovative writing might make the book a status or 'intelligence' symbol to some. For instance, those who want to be seen to have an interest in reputable contemporary literature might have been persuaded to purchase the paperback for this reason (Blythe, 2001).
As a paperback re-launch, this latest Will Self novella was arguably a very safe venture. It could even be described as a reflex publication on part of Penguin, who has published all of Self 's fiction in paperback format (). With such an established and esteemed writer as he, the publisher 's market research need not be so thorough.
Still, the paperback giants obviously ascertained that their market would receive this new title well, and no doubt through these quantitative research methods (Davies, 2004):
They would have assessed the sales figures of the hardcover edition to judge the potential validity of a paperback rights purchase.
The publishers need only look at their own sales figures for previous Will Self paperbacks to make a decision on the likely reception of the next.
Will Self is a very prominent figure in both the print and broadcast media. He has won specialist literary prizes, including The Geoffrey Faber Memorial Prize for his first collection of stories, The Quantity Theory of Insanity (1993). Bloomsbury, the original publishers of the hardback, had this notoriety as a marketing advantage and an indicator of his work 's potential reach and success.
Competition in the general adult fiction sector of publishing is rife, with more books published year on year and publishers vying for the window and shelf space of retailers.
Also, Dr. Mukti and Other Tales of Woe was published on the 27th January 2005, at a time when a certain phenomenon was very much affecting the book world. On 12 th January 2005, the extremely popular Richard and Judy 's Book Club was launched for a second season on Channel 4. The chat show hosts reviewed books of all kinds for the public, with a tendency towards literary adult fiction such as The Time Traveler 's Wife by Audrey Niffenegger (Vintage). This was very positive for the book trade, importantly generating hype around new books and authors. Still, other books published around the same time, including Self 's, struggled to contend. The titles that had been reviewed on the television feature were naturally given a great deal more promotional space by booksellers, seizing the attention of many more adult book-buyers.
However, Penguin proudly boasts the most recognisable publisher 's brand in the world, giving it a strong competitive edge. Since 1993, it has distinctly branded all of Self 's paperback fiction including the latest novella (Appendix 1). Despite launching this title into a fiercely competitive trade environment, then, Penguin marked out both the author and themselves as his reputable publisher from rivals.
The product is the most tangible aspect of the marketing mix, and definitely so in the case of Dr. Mukti and Other Tales of Woe. The front cover clearly informs us that this is an author-led book. Self 's name is written in a font size approximately four times bigger than the title, and in those large, lowercase and sans-serif letters which have become his brand, intended to trigger recognition and stamp quality (Appendix 2).
The product remains conventional in terms of its format and extent. It is the industry standard B format, with perfect binding and the cheap cartridge paper that readers have come to expect from novels. All of this makes it a typical Penguin paperback, with the small but instantly identifiable orange logo in the top right corner. The bold red and white image of the cover, set against the black background, conveys the dark subject matter of Self 's novella. It is also rather striking and mysterious, no doubt in order to provoke intrigue in the passing book-buyer.
One of the most notable things about the product is that it lacks a blurb, and instead has quotations from reviews on the back cover (Appendix 3). This is likely due to the fact that it is a re-launched collection of stories, but also emphasises the achievement and receipt of the author in the literary world.
This particular product, it is clear, fits into Penguin 's list as part of a brand that they are dedicated to.
The   7.99 price point of this paperback re-launch is as conventional as its format. Trade adult paperbacks largely remain in between six and eight pounds, and this reflects the fierce competition in the sector. In opting to meet the price of their competitors with this book, it seems Penguin have tried to excel in other areas of their marketing mix, and most noticeably promotion (Blythe, 2001). This is true of all their other Will Self novels and novellas too, none of which exceed   8.99.
The title was sold widely across UK chain and independent bookstores:
Borders very prominently displayed the title face out and shelved it with other frontlist books. They sold it throughout February and early March as part of a 3 for 2 sales promotion. Will Self came to the Oxford store to sign copies in mid-February, and after his visit the remaining signed books were stacked at the till as an impulse-buy option for queuing customers.
Blackwell 's also used a multi-buy sales offer, selling the book in a 3 for 2 promotion until the end of February 2005. The stores used these sales promotions to speed up the customer 's decision-making process by suggesting that the product represented good value (Blythe, 2001). Also, they used the attention-grabbing technique of presenting the book face-out, so that the cover marketing messages were clearly visible.
Waterstone 's were the only chain not to employ a sales promotion strategy with the product. They displayed it face out with Self 's older paperback books behind, perhaps relying on fans of the author who knew what they were looking for, rather than those customers swayed by sales offers.
It was also sold direct to users by various on-line discount retailers, namely Amazon.
Virtually all of the broadsheet reviews took place around the launch of the original hardback publication in 2004. However, as mentioned, they were quoted on the back of the re-release, and most were archived in the on-line versions of the newspapers, still accessible to those who are interested (Appendix 5).
It seems that Penguin 's promotional efforts were more focused on author public relations and establishment, given that the title had already been received and had made an impression.
The author himself is clearly the hub of Penguin 's promotion campaign. He has for a long time been involved in various sectors of the media, and recognises that he has cultivated a brand with his publisher (Appendix 6, page 2).
The promotion activities have taken place steadily since the book 's publication. In February, Self toured chain bookshops in the South East, usually Borders stores, during which he signed copies of the paperback for fans. Details of these signings were broadcast and printed in local media. Also, and reflecting the esteem of the author and his work, he attended the Essex Book Festival on March 22 nd, and also the Bay Literary Festival on April 21 st, on both occasions discussing the re-launch. His reputation gets him invitations to other events, too, many outside of the publishing world. He can take these opportunities to raise-awareness about his new books, and did in February at a Curzon Cinemas film fans series (Appendix 8).
Appendix 7 shows that he did similar tours of the UK to promote the hardback version the previous year.
As part of its '70 Years' celebration this May, Penguin is also launching seventy 'Pocket' paperbacks. These are an eclectic selection of small format books, showcasing what Penguin regards as its most iconic and important authors. Number forty in the list gives a sample of Self 's work - two short stories to demonstrate his gift for 'innovative, experimental work' (Appendix 4). Of course, this spin-off promotion is intended to boost sales of all titles on the Penguin backlist, including Dr. Mukti and Other Tales of Woe.
Penguin 's website displayed the title cover in the 'new releases' feature of its homepage throughout February, and also contains a brief blurb about the product and author (Appendix 9). A navigable and simply designed site, I feel it worked well as a marketing tool, allowing consumers to inform themselves about the book, and also acting as Penguin 's distribution channel by giving them the ability to buy online via Amazon ().
Notably, the author 's unofficial website did not promote the new paperback. Instead it shows only the hardback version, and has content focused more on interviews with Self (Appendix 10).
All considered, it is most clear that this re-launch of Dr. Mukti and Other Tales of Woe was marketing-orientated. It was a campaign that optimised both the reputation of the author and of Penguin, far more than it pushed the content of the novella. Its mix of activities was well integrated, however, and revealed the publisher 's apparent objectives:
The extensive author PR showed a desire to build loyalty among fans and thus boost sales long term.
The campaign reminds readers and indeed competitors that 'inspired branding has always been Penguin 's trademark' (Walsh, The Independent).
Penguin demonstrated that they have a commitment to esteemed literary authors like Will Self.
The book essentially reiterates Penguin 's long-standing reputation for bringing high-brow titles to the masses, given the paperback segmentation and competition-pricing.
I feel the publishers have succeeded in all of these respects, due to the attention they paid to heavy product branding and author promotion within their marketing mix. The campaign, it is obvious, did not intend to produce a bestseller, but as a re-launch on the brink of the '70 Years' celebration, it certainly delivered the intended message that Penguin are still excellent at what they do.
