The focus of this essay will mainly be on technical publishing, but this will inevitably cover some aspects of language used in a business environment and on the Internet.
A linguist will tell us that language is constantly changing and that there is nothing we can do to stop those changes once they have been accepted by the majority. New words and phrases are being coined all the time, and this is most evident in business and professional publishing where language has to keep apace with the latest business strategies and advances in technology. The IT industry, in particular, is notorious for its use of industry-specific jargon.
There is a huge debate going on in research publishing about the amount of jargon used in technical research papers. The question is: Does anybody actually understand it? The answer depends on who you talk to.
Until the 1990s, many IT departments had total control over their companies' spending on new technology. Two factors changed this. One was the end of the dot com era in the late 1990s and the other was the gradual outsourcing of IT and customer services in an effort to reduce costs.
The job of buying new technology shifted from the IT department to other areas in the company. These new decision makers were not "techies" but business people. They were tasked with finding out which were the best products on the market, which vendors gave most value and which offered the best services. But without an IT department to help make these decisions, business leaders would find it difficult to decipher a lot of technical research.
Those that edit this research argue that pieces should become shorter and clearer, and contain a strong sales message, which would appeal to a wider audience.
But the analysts that write the research try to convince us that customers are quite happy with the levels of technicality in their publications. This is despite criticism from the media that authors of such research, to maintain their "mystique", deliberately "dress up" a simple idea to make it appear more complex than it really is.
This can be done in many ways and a few examples of "technospeak" are outlined below.
New technology demands the creation of new words to describe that technology. For example, a piece of published research on Intrusion Prevention Systems mentions that, "...while most hackers employ technical intrusions, they may also use social intrusions, such as calling someone [...] claiming to be somebody else and requesting information to be sent to an e-mail drop." The term used to describe this is "wetware intrusion" (Gartner Research). Wetware can be defined as the programming of the brain, as opposed to software.
Other examples of social intrusions include: "dumpster diving", where corporate and personal data ends up in the bin and people make money by retrieving that data and selling it to interested parties. There is also "shoulder surfing" which involves standing behind someone (at an auto teller queue, for instance) and obtaining information like pin numbers.
The following are classic examples of how several individually meaningful nouns are gathered together into one long and often ambiguous list, without a verb in sight. "This job will involve fault analysis systems troubleshooting handbook preparation.".
Another favourite technique in technical publishing is to use an abstract noun derived from a verb, instead of using the verb itself. For example, using "implementation of" instead of "to implement". This makes whatever is being written about sound more complex than it really is.
Technical authors quite often use words in a completely different context from how they are normally used. Take the word "footprint". Apart from its obvious meaning, this has another distinct definition in technical publishing. A footprint is also the physical space that a PC takes up on a desk top. Now, authors have taken this meaning one step further and talk about a company 's "geographical footprint", when they mean a firm 's presence in a particular market.
A recent hot favourite within the analyst community is the incorrect use of the word "ecosystem". Technical authors use the word when they mean a hierarchical IT system.
There is an enormous amount of business jargon used in professional publishing. There is no doubt that, in time, they will become perfectly acceptable - and many words already are - but for a few die-hard sub editors this will be later, rather than sooner.
Here are some examples that are seen in print every day, with the preferred term alongside.
These are used everywhere in business and particularly technical publishing. They are so common that many of us only know a product by its acronym or abbreviation, but not what it stands for. For instance CD-ROM, DVD, IT, PC, SMS, RAM, GPS and HR.
Sometimes life 's easier if we do n't know what an acronym or abbreviation stands for. Take DVD, for instance, which was originally said to mean digital video disc, and later for digital versatile disc. The current official stance of the DVD Forum is that the format should just be referred to as DVD.
Such is their frequency of use that some acronyms and abbreviations come to be used for completely disconnected things. For example, DNA. In chemistry, DNA stands for deoxyribonucleic acid. But it also stands for Distributed interNet Applications Architecture, Microsoft 's Web Solution Platform.
And sometimes they can be ridiculously difficult to expand as with recursive acronyms. For example, the operating system GNU stands for Gnu 's Not UNIX.
Finally, here 's a published example of how too many acronyms and abbreviations can spell trouble in professional publishing.
American firms dominate the technical and business world. Such companies can overlook the fact that, despite the influence of Hollywood over the English language, many nations are taught British English or other forms of English, and not American English. Therefore, there has to be some form of mediation when publishing research from an American company.
And not every U.S. English speaker is aware of the subtle differences in meaning between words in their native English and, say, British English. Many slang terms, idioms and cultural references - particularly jokes or references based on movie titles, television shows or popular songs - will confuse readers in different parts of the world. Their use in technical and business publications should be avoided, as should the use of words that are used only in U.S. English ("Americanisms"), or only in U.K. English ("Britishisms").
Americanisms include:
Britishisms to be avoided might include:
Sometimes the same terms can have different meanings depending on which side of the Atlantic you are on. For example, a "bomb" in U.S. English means "a major failure," while in U.K. English it refers to "a big success." To "table" something in the United States means "to set aside," while in the United Kingdom it means "to bring to a vote.".
Another thing to consider when writing research for an international audience is that the seasons are not consistent time references worldwide. It 's best to avoid phrases like "planned for delivery this summer" or "an event held in the fall". We should use time references such as months, dates or quarters of the year instead. The seasons differ between the Northern Hemisphere and the Southern Hemisphere, as "winter" in Australia and Argentina is "summer" in Europe and the United States.
In business and technical publishing, words are being coined every day to describe new products and experiences that the Internet may bring. How long will it be before all of these appear in the dictionary?.
There is almost no IT research published in languages other than English. This is because roots of the Internet lie in the United States, and its design, infrastructure, protocols and standards bear the mark of a complete lack of regard for the needs of communications in a variety of natural languages. The underlying technologies are all in English and only in the content and some Web browsers are other languages found. Even with domain names "the technology offers most to Anglophones. Other Latin script users have to compromise (no accents) and other scripts are excluded. The same situation occurs with filenames, often used more or less directly in Internet transactions." ().
It is ironic that most of the content available on the Internet is in English with an American accent while more and more non-English speakers - 65.3% () - are using the Internet, with actual content and services in their native languages lagging behind.
Despite the dominance of U.S. English on the Internet, and in technical and business publishing, improvements are taking place. Some companies are waking up to the fact that domestic markets for their products are almost saturated. They are starting to design software products with localized support from the offset and which do not make assumptions based on a single language or locale. And those that plan from the beginning to support "internationalisation" will find they have cost-effective access to foreign markets.
Whether or not non-English languages like Chinese will eventually dominate the Internet, and the next-generation of Internet-connected software applications and associated published research, they will certainly dominate the Internet in their respective countries.
However, by the very nature of its structure, it seems unlikely that English will be ousted in favour of other world languages when it comes to "technospeak" or "business speak". The English language has the ability to absorb and regurgitate new and foreign words quite unlike any other.
