The Pliocene is a period of remarkable hominin diversity, and there has been considerable progress in the later part of the 20 th century in unravelling the hominin tree, and much understanding of the terminal beginnings of our own genus attained. Yet, there is much yet to uncover before we can say with any justified conviction who the earliest members of our taxonomic group, Homo, where.
This essay can be functionally conceptionalized as running two parallel contents in one essay. A first regarding; the identification of the earliest potential members of the Homo genus, and subsequent description of diversity contained among them. Secondly, a detailed discussion and critical refinement of a general problem in biology, that of taxonomic classification, with special regard to the terminal boundaries of our own genus; Homo. In effect, discussion and debate will ensue in the style of a literary  'spandrel', two algorithms advancing in one.
The issue of geographic and chronological distribution of early hominids will, of course, be dealt with specifically and generally within and throughout the essay. With special attention to their necessary connection with the earliest tool makers.
Prospective candidates for the earliest members of the Homo genus will be discussed in alignment with pre-determined membership criteria and factors of cladistic interpretation. Contrast will be made with related and contemporaneous genera.
Although, a final decisive judgement on who are the earliest taxa with Homo will not be reached in this work, the attempt here is too clarify the strongest lines of thought available in contemporary debate, fully elaborate on hominin diversity contained within, with review in a historical context. Following, to explain why a final, decisive adjudication can not be attained.
Our own genus Homo exemplifies taxonomic difficulties of classification. Established by Linnaeus in 1758, in the systemae naturae, Homo is one of five genera currently assigned to the 'tribe' Hominini (Boyd & Silk 2003). For more than a century, the fossil record for human evolution was viewed as ladder like series of succession of species, with an apelike ancestor at the bottom and modern humans at the top. The modern fossil record is now demonstrating it to be more complex than that, more like a series of dramatic adaptive radiations of early hominin species.
For necessity of clarification, when H.ergaster is referred to, it can be understood as being representative of all H.ergaster and H.erectus material contained within Africa. H.erectus will refer to all related Asian material.
Who are the members of early Homo?.
As the essay progresses it will become apparent that the two species of (H/A).habilis & (H/K).rudolfensis are to be considered the strongest candidates for the earliest terminal taxon, merits and problems of classification discussed.
There is currently great debate among systematists over the definition of genus category as part of a wider discussion about the taxonomic implications of recent developments in phylogenetic analysis (Wood & Collard 1999). I want to illustrate the two main interpretations of the category genus being debated.
The first being that of the evolutionary systematic, species belonging to a particular genus sharing a common ancestry and occupying a similar adaptive zone or ecological situation different to that of related genera (Mayr 1950). Under this definition the genus can either be monophyletic or paraphyletic. Species can still have common ancestry, yet it is not necessary that they share a common ancestor within the ontological time spanned by the species of the genus. They must just share an inter-related adaptive zone.
The second definition demands species within a genus be more closely related to each other, than to that of other species assigned to related genera. Under the cladistic definition the species of the genus can only be monophyletic.
Advocates of the cladistic system reject that of the evolutionary systematic due to their belief that paraphyletic taxa are not real evolutionary units. Yet, on the other hand problems persist for those who classify taxa in virtue of their monophyletic basis, in that; there is no criterion for specifying how many species should be included in the genus. Evolution is a gradual process over grand periods of time, evolution by punctuated equilibrium is theoretically problematic (Dawkins 1989, 1999; Dennett 1996). So, where do you define lower limits? Which are the terminal species? In the gradual sense of adaptationism a terminal species within a monophylum would share an adaptive strategy with directly related taxa contained within an ancestrally related juxtaposed genus; units in gradual evolution on a monophyletic line. Can this possibly be overcome by recognising the terminal species as an evolutionary coherent unit and classifying it as a monotypic genus? In addition, determination and removal of paraphyletic taxa is particularly problematic when dealing with such forces as convergent evolution. One pragmatic solution from Wood and Collard (1999: 66) is to carefully revise and redefine a genus category in gradistic terms of the first interpretation above, so that paraphyletic taxa are inadmissible. Yet, such as strategy is not an easy task when applying it to taxa of the fossil record.
Although to highlight difficulties as illustrated above, that adaptationism in its gradual evolutionary sense is problematic in the classification of monophyletic taxa. I still concur with Wood & Collard that:
Therefore, we have determined cladistics as the method of choice for identifying monophyletic groups. Yet, we still require an equivocal system for identifying adaptive strategies, or zones as stated by Wood & Collard above. A definition of a genus category that does not permit the entry of paraphyletic taxa; a strategy unique to the monophyletic genus. Wood & Collard (1999:66) combat this by stating that taxonomic units contained within the Homo genus should, by monophyletic definition, be more related to H.sapiens than to other related genera such as the Australopithicines or Paranthropines. In the course of the essay will shall take this into account and also consider other criteria of membership considered to be unique to the Homo genus.
Olduvai Gorge in Kenya National Park has been the site of many convention redefining finds of early hominin fossil remains. The first discoveries of prospective Homo remains were found not long after Mary Leakey found 'Zinj' (Zinjanthropus Boisei), now known as A.boisei, in 1960. Mode 1 tooling had previously been found in the area dating to around 2.6-2.3mya (Semaw et.al 1997), yet were only tentatively being connected to 'Zinj', being of small cranial vault size dated to 1.75mya via the first application of radiometric dating (argon/potassium) in anthropology (Leakeyal. 1961). Between 1960 and 1963, in a period of pressure and interest in the public eye to uncover more about out earliest ancestors, Louis Leakey who had been working in the area since the 1930s made a series of discoveries.
The fossil remains known as OH 7, found by Louis Leakey in 1960, were the dawn of a new era in the debate of Homo. With an increased cranial vault size of 640cc, compared to that of 513cc of A.boisei, Leakey quickly made the connection between the remains of OH7 and the Mode 1 stone tooling found in the area. Leakey was determined to press H.habilis (OH7), as a member of the Homo genus, even though it did not fit the requirements of Homo classification. Named 'habilis on Raymond Dart 's recommendation (Lewin & Foley 2004). Therefore, acting accordingly, Leakey (1964:7) in his 1964 paper redefined the criteria of the Homo genus to ensure entry of H.habilis. This caused a great deal of uproar, as it broke convention and it did not fit with contemporary thinking of Homo.
In the late 1940 's Sir Author Keith proposed a figure of 750cc for the bottom limit of Homo, that being a calculated mid-point between the largest known gorilla brain and the smallest human brain. This was one of four main criteria for entry in the Homo genus, and by 1964 this proposal was widely accepted.
As previously mentioned, OH7 's estimated cranium capacity was 640cc, yet not being fully mature it was estimated at adulthood it would have reached a full capacity of 673cc. Although, still too small to be accepted by the general consensus of requirement for entry of Homo at the time. This did not deter Leakey, who continued to insist the reliability of his argument which included that of one of cultural traits, in that OH-7 was the logically deductive candidate for the maker and user of the Mode 1 tools that had been found in Olduvai Gorge. This being the first time the use of an argument of cultural traits had been utilized to explain reasoning in the fossil record (Lewin & Foley 2004), and caused much wide spread disagreement.
However, due to other fossil findings that fitted with H.habilis, (see Fossils table at beginning of next section), and Leakey 's continued pressure on the scientific community H.habilis and the revision of the original 4 criteria for membership of Homo have become more or less accepted. Yet, further debate still persists and will be a continued theme of this essay.
Without taking any formal definitions into account, taking Leakey 's (1964:7) revisions into account, in practise fossil hominin species are assigned to Homo in satisfying at least one of four of the following criteria (Leakey, Tobias & Napier 1964; Tobias 1991):
Yet, these criteria are anything but fixed convention for membership of Homo. It is recently been proposed (e.g. Wood & Collard 1999, Boyd & Silk 2002) than none of these criteria are now satisfactory, as it is not certain whether the criteria accurately represent features essential to membership of Homo, or unique to the Homo genus. Doubts and areas for further debate in the course of this essay are as follows; As Martin (1983) suggests, the Cerebral Rubicon is now problematic due to the doubt of absolute cranial capacity being of biological significance. In relevance to the second point of criteria, there is substantial doubt that the language function cannot reliably be inferred from the structure of Endocasts BROCA 's AREA, neither are language related parts of the brain as well localised as previous studies implied (Galaburda & Pandya 1982; Gannon et.al 1998). Functional morphological analyses of the hands of the early hominins have indicated that either a precision grip should not only be restricted to the genus of Homo, as there is evidence for its functional use amongst the Australopithecus genus whose behaviour and diet is likely to be radically different to that of Homo according to other related morphological data. Or, that it cannot be assured of the possession of the precision grip amongst any of the early hominins (Susman 1994; 1998). With respect to the fourth criterion Semaw (1997) has suggested that the connection between Homo and stone tool manufacture, which come from deposits 2.6-2.3 million years old, were almost certainly contemporaneous with both early Homo and the Australopithecus genera. It is even difficult to find at present a likely candidate amongst the Homo fossil remains as stone tooling appears to precede them.
The above criticisms are anything but final and will be further discussed in the essay. Yet, Wood & Collard (1999), as discussed in a previous section prefer to adopt an alternative cladistic strategy of trying to identify an adaptive strategy unique to the genus, in the attempt to eliminate paraphyletic taxa. Yet, in that attempt they are forced to identify criteria of that adaptive zone. It is hard to dismiss criteria such as use of Mode 1 tooling requiring sophisticated cognitive architecture as not being an integral part of what is to be part of the Homo genus, or integral to the adaptive zone or strategy of the genus. There must be criteria, grey areas to exist with respect to terminal species in a gradual (not punctuated) monophyletic evolutionary line. Therefore, we shall continue with Wood & Collard 's (1999) notion that of a genus should be a monophylum, yet will offer flexibility with respect to criteria in what constitutes an adaptive strategy. Classification of a gradual process is problematic, better to view many criteria instead of few and abduct a decision among convention.
In the 1980s, due to new substantial discoveries made Olduvai Gorge and Lake Turkana, and the increasing diversity of fossils being assigned to H.habilis taxon, centrally determined by finds of and OH 62 and the 1972 find of KNM-ER 1470 a taxonomic split was determined as necessary. Previously assigned fossils were split amongst the two new independent taxa. H.habilis remained, H.rudolfensis named after Lake Rudolf, now known as Lake Turkana was created. This section discusses the increase diversity amongst early Homo that lead to the split.
Fossils remains and their new relative assigned taxa. Found according to region, adapted from Bilsborough (1992).
All assigned to H.habilis.
Both assigned to Homo habilis.
All assigned to Homo rudolfensis, but only KNM ER 1470 generally accepted as evidence.
In 1972, Louis Leakey made a discovery which was to make him world famous and further effect the clade of Homo. KNM-ER 1470 (figure 1) was the larger part of a cranium pieced together by Alan Walker and Maeve Leakey (1978). The face of the fossil was reconstructed to have a face that was large and flat with little prognathism, the eye brow ridges were greatly reduced and palate that was large and wide, the absent teeth would have been large. These features did not immediately align it with either the Australopithecine or Homo as contained features of both genera, but it 's cranial capacity was measured to be in excess of 750cc fitting with even Sir Author Keith 's 1940s proposal for criterion of Homo.
Problems of acceptance and interpretation persisted. Minimal bone remained in the specimen, the cranial vault capacity was taken to be reliable, yet the angle at with the face jutted out from the face was questioned by the scientific community. As Lewin and Foley (2004: 287) point out; if the face was place straight and flat it was to resemble Homo, if it was placed at an increased angle it was more representative of Australopithicus. Even Walker and Leakey debated over to which genera the fossil was to be assigned, Lewin and Foley explain that the reluctance at the time to name KNM-ER 147- as H. habilis is an obvious one:
It 's brain was considerably larger than the 640cc of the Olduvai habilis, and 1470 was thought to be much older. The Olduvai habilis was less than 2 million years old, while state-of-the-art radiometric dating gave an age of 2.6 miliion years for 1470 (2004:287).
It late transpired that the KNM-ER radiometric dating could be considered unreliable, and the actual figure could be reduced as low as 1.9mya. Yet, despite uncertainties about the fossil remains it had gone the way of showing itself to be physically different from both A.africanus and H.ergaster (H.erectus at the time), and brought into question the whole classification of H.habilis.
A year after KNM-ER 1470 's discovery another fossil find at Lake Turkana was to further increase the diversity in the lumped category of H.habilis. KNM-ER 1813 (Walker & Leakey 1978), its face and palate were similar to those the H.habilis finds at Olduvai and different to that of KNM-ER 1470, but only had a cranial vault of 500cc (figure 2). Some scientists attributed the find to H.habilis on account of its being a female, yet Leakey himself was not responsible for this.
OH 62 was discovered in Olduvai Gorge in 1986 by Donald Johanson, Tim White. It was extremely fragmented and was comprised of part of the upper jaw, some cranial fragments most of the right arm and parts of both legs. They assigned it to H.habilis (Johanson & White 1987). They also gave reason that it resembled a fossil specimen STW 53 assigned to H.habilis found in Swarkrans, South Africa. OH 62 had some startling characteristics. It was a mature female approximating a height of 1m tall, similar to that of AL-288-1 the robust australopithecine 'Lucy'. But, the most poignant feature was, as pointed out in the paper by Martin and Hartwig-Scherer (1991) 'Was Lucy more human than her child?' the intermembral index of the arms and legs of OH 62 were similar to that of a chimpanzee. As the relative charts show (figures 3 & 4) OH 62 's arms were longer than that of 'Lucy' and it 's leg shorter. The average intermembral ratio in humans is 70%, 97-100% in chimpanzees, 'Lucy' 85%, yet OH 62 was calculated to be 95%!.
In is not hard to see why the fossil remains of KNM-ER 1470 and OH 62 instrumentative in the decision to split the H.habilis taxon into two, rather than having them all lumped into one which could have formed some kind of biological unreality. We can now further contrast characteristics of what are currently considered typical traits of both H.habilis and H.rudolfensis, and contrast them with the Australopithecine, where applicable, with the aim of further demonstrating diversity amongst potentially early hominids. The summary is roughly based around Bernhard Wood 's (1991) taxonomic distinction for the separate taxa, and drawn from many sources.
Andrew Hill and Steven Ward re-assessing a temporal bone of a hominin found in 1967, in the Chemeron formation near Lake Baringo, central Kenya, determined the fossil reminiscent of that of Homo, and radiometric dated it to be 2.4 million years. The structure of the ear was of particular interest, the mandibular fossa, which they identified diagnostic of Homo.
In another similar such case, in 1993 Schrenk & Bromage published a description of a hominid mandible fragment found near Lake Malawi. The mandible was substantially less robust than that of the Australopithecine and had smaller cheek teeth, indicative of a connection with Homo. The authors drew comparisons and assigned the fossil to H.rudolfensis. The remains were dated by faunal correlation to between 2.5 and 2.3 million years old.
The necessary connection that is facilitated due to these earliest prospective Homo dates, is the link to that of the Mode 1 stone tooling that has been discovered in both Kenya and Ethiopia, and recently in bone tools in South Africa (Backwell and D'Errico 2001) at dates correlating to these ages.
The question that needs to be asked: Is mode 1 tooling enough to constitute automatic membership of Homo? As noted previously Semaw (1997) points out that the stone tools found 2.3 to 2.6 million years ago are right in the middle of a hominin radiation with potentially three genera of hominins present. Who made them? Susman in his 1994 paper examined all available material of the morphology of hand structure of hominins present at this time. He proposed although the fingertips of A.afarensis were very apelike having curved phalanges, thin tips to the fingers and a short thumb (Lewin & Foley 2004). Susman (1994) in contrast, upon inspection of the fossil remains of robust australopithecine site at Swarkans in South Africa reported that the thumb was much broader and more mobile and the fingertips much broader. Susman conjectured that this would have enabled stone tool making amongst the robust australopithicines if the appropriate cognitive facility was applicable. Although differences in opinion have arisen over these conclusions, the recent discovery of simple bone tools such as digging sticks at a related site at Swarkrans by Backwell and D'Errico (2001) could further substantiate Susman 's theory.
Of course there is plenty of room for doubt in Susman 's theory, the fingers of the robust Australopithecine could be adaptive for some other function. We also need to take into account that of A.garhi, the fossil remains that were found near to animal bones with cut marks, suggestive of tool use and consumption (Asfaw et.al 1999). It is easy to make the connection between this small brained Australopithecine and the manufacture of tools, but maybe it should be taken so rashly. There is, of course the possible scenario that this hominin was too consumed along with the animal remains by a larger brained early hominid. As stated at the start of this section, there is evidence that exists showing the possibility of a related hominid around at this time, and extensive faunal flow between the regions (Lewin & Foley 2004). H.rudolfensis?.
It is now worthy of note that no remains have been found of H.habilis that could be connected to the earliest known tools dated, as H.habilis at earliest appears after 2 million years.
In 1999, Maeve Leakey found an almost complete cranium, amongst other hominin pieces on the shore of Lake Turkana at Lomekwi. These fossils known as KNM-WT 40000, dated to 3.5 million years ago (making it contemporaneous with A.afarensis) were too dissimilar to any Homo, or Australopithecus fossils found before; so much so in fact, that they were given a new genus; Kenyanthropus. (Lewin and Foley 2004). The question then arose of how this hominin played a part in the phylogenic lines of Homo. When H.habilis had first been announced Le Gros Clark and others had voiced opinion that there had there had been insufficient evolutionary time between the subject and the Australopithecines. Could K.Platyops have evolved on a separate phylogenic line to that of the Australopithecines that gave rise to Homo? Lewin and Foley (2004: 290) have suggested that the closest known specimen which would fit Kenyanthropus would be KNM-ER 1470, originally assumed to be a specimen of Homo rudolfensis, certainly a contentious issue as the striking feature of KNM-ER 40000 is its broad flat face reminiscent of both KNM-ER 1470 and members of Homo. A contentious issue gaining academic support (Boyd & Silk 2002).
The inclusion of K.Platyops in the fossil record certainly adds support to the possibility of there being a monophyletic line connecting the Homo through an early terminal taxonomic member to earlier genera. This was as you will remember one of the key criteria for our definition of a genus defined in the earlier relevant section. If we view the tabulated phylogeny (figure 7) by Boyd and Silk 2002, it can be seen that (H/K).rudolfensis has already been entered as by Boyd and Silk as part of the Kenyanthropus genus. Just to remember, (H/K).rudolfensis is a terminal species of both these genera, and could be considered a boundary species, yet it does illustrate an extremely appealing monophyletic possibility.
In relation to chronology, I should like to bring attention to the issue surrounding OH 62 assigned to H.habilis, and to H.ergaster KNM-ER 15000 also known as 'Turkana Boy'. OH 62 dated between 1.85-1.75 mya having the the post-cranial structure and Intermembral index of an ape and a height of 1m, and KNM-ER 15000 dated to around 1.75mya being post-carnially anatomically modern at a height of 2m tall (Lewin & Foley 2004). You of course have to allow for anatomically within a species, yet how within a time period of less than 100,000 years could OH 62 evolve into KNM-ER 15000? Rapid evolution? We can fairly safely say that both of these species were most probably contemporaneous to each other. This, in effect, ruling out the possibility of a monophyletic line, making them paraphylum, and drawing substantial doubt on the worthiness of membership of this group of fossil remains to Homo.
Well established debate is justifiably founded as to where to place and how indeed to taxonomically classify H.habilis and H.rudolfensis. The fossil record is impoverished for this time period, and any taxonomic grouping highly theoretical.
Therefore, in conclusion we can only hints towards true concluding remarks and areas of interest for the future. As follows;.
If Homo is to be monophyletic H.habilis should not be entered in to the Homo genus as evidence strongly shows it to come from a paraphyletic line of ancestry.
Remains of H.rudolfenesis although coming from an impoverished fossil record, with the recent inclusion of K.Platyops in the fossil record and that of the possibility of a monophyletic line appears to be the better candidate for entry into the Homo genus. Including being the better candidate for maker of the earliest stone tooling found by Louis Leakey at Olduvai, as to have shown contemporaneous with it.
Further early hominid discoveries are sure to shed light on this debate. Further finds of H.rudolfensis would be of much interest especially if containing more post-cranial material. Possible finds facilitating the connection of K.platyops through (H/K).rudolfensis to post cranial similarities with H.ergaster on a monophyletic line.
Classification for criteria of adaptive strategies themselves is highly problematic for terminal species in the fossil record.
Alignment with a genus of (H/K).rudolfensis & (H/A).habilis is possibly too soon. If truly terminal species, discoveries in the fossil record will facilitate a truer taxonomic classification. The Pliocene is being revealed to have been a remarkable time of diversity for early hominin radiations. Only with the increase of material found in the fossil record will our understanding and taxonomic classifications improve.
