Natal dispersal, or the movement of organisms away from a place of birth, occurs among a range of species (Brookeral. 1999). Dispersal to a new group may be temporary, or a permanent transfer (Pusy & Packer, 1987). Individuals often go to extreme lengths to migrate from their natal group, e.g. Japanese macaques (Macaca fuscata) have been seen travelling 60 kilometres to reach new breeding groups (Pusey & Packer, 1987). Long distance dispersal of this nature may be costly both energetically and through the increased risk of predation and potential aggression from strangers (e.g. vervet monkeys (Chlorocebus aethiops): Cheney & Seyfarth, 1983; olive baboons (Papio anubis): Packer & Pusey, 1979). Dispersal often incurs locational costs as individuals leave behind a familiar home range (Isbell & van Vuren, 1996), e.g. individuals from a group of red howler monkeys (Aloatta seniculus) suffered protein and phosphorous deficiency due to a poor diet as a result of reduced foraging efficiency in unfamiliar forests following dispersal (Pope, 1989). Primates are predominantly social mammals spending a high proportion of time making fervent bonds and securing relationships with group members (de Waal, 1988). Therefore, the social costs of leaving a familiar family group may also be high.
Despite the apparent drawbacks dispersal by one or both sexes occurs frequently among primates (Greenwood 1980). So what are the benefits and why do so many group-living animals choose to disperse? This essay will look at the reasons why non-human primates disperse from their natal groups, the different strategies employed, and the genetic consequences for the individual, the social group and the species population structure. Finally the consequences of dispersal on conservation will be considered.
Although group life provides safety in numbers there is a price to be paid. This comes in the form of competition for food and access to mates (Dunbar and Barrett, 2000). Seeking unexploited resources and avoiding intra-sexual competition provide possible explanations as to why primates disperse (Waser, 1985). Avoiding the deleterious genetic consequences of close inbreeding, causing lethal and semi-lethal recessive genes to become fixed within a population, is thought to be the main factor promoting dispersal (Bengtsson, 1978).
An individual 's decision to stay or go depends on the cost-benefit balance for dispersal and remaining at the natal group, or being philopatric (Korstjen & Schippers, 2002). Several studies have found a complex set of variables to be the proximate cause of natal dispersal across a range of species (Belding 's ground squirrels (Spermophilus beldingi): Holekamp, 2004; olive baboons: Pusey & Packer, 1987; vervet monkeys: Cheney & Seyfarth, 1983). Motives for dispersal will vary throughout an individuals' lifetime, and between animals of different age or sex within the same species, thus a broad selection of patterns exist (Isbell & van Vuren, 1996; Pusy & Packer, 1983).
For some species dispersal is seasonal, e.g. woolly monkeys (Lagothrix lagtricha) and for others it occurs throughout the year, e.g. other muriquis (Nishimura, 2003). It is influenced by group size, range size and proximity to neighbouring ranges (Isbell & van Vuren, 1996). Dispersal may prevail where risks are minimal, e.g. when habitats overlap and individuals may transfer into a new social environment without incurring costs of locational dispersal (Isbell et al, 2003).
Primates express 'age-biased' dispersal with different species preferably migrating at different stages in their maturity (e.g. juveniles are predominantly the mobile element of social groups for red colobus monkeys (Procolobus spp.): Marsh, 1979). On rare occasions dispersal may occur subsequently during adulthood, e.g. olive baboons, (Pusey & Packer, 1987) and vervet monkeys, (Cheney & Seyfarth, 1983). Secondary dispersal may be random (e.g. howler monkeys (Alloatta spp. ), Pope, 1992) or non-random (e.g. macaques (Macaca spp.): Colvin, 1983) as illustrated in figure 1(see appendix). Age related changes in the social benefits of non-random and random transfer have important genetic consequences on the population structure as a whole but in contrast to natal dispersal these are rarely related to inbreeding avoidance (Korstjen & Schippers, 2002).
For some species both sexes disperse. Among monogamous species containing a single breeding female (e.g. gibbons and tamarins) or those living in uni-male harem groups both sexes are inclined to disperse (Pusey & Packer, 1987). Species in which natal emigration by both sexes is common include red howlers monkeys (Alouatta seniculus), gorillas (Gorilla spp.), hamadryas baboons (Papio hamadryas) and some populations of red colobus monkey. More commonly, one sex will leave while the other is philopatric remaining with the natal group. This is known as  'sex-biased' dispersal (Cowlishaw & Dunbar, 2000).
Lehman and Perrin (2003) propose that asymmetry among conflicting efforts to minimize competition induces the dispersal of one sex over the other. In polygynous systems, where mating partners do not stay together (most nonhuman primates), Perrin and Goudet (2001) predict that a situation of pure kin competition avoidance will result in both sexes dispersing equally. Inbreeding destabilises the equilibrium and thus is believed to account for the association between dispersal and philopatry of the two sexes (Lehman & Perrin, 2003).
For species containing more than one breeding female males will usually disperse from the natal group while females are philopatric, (e.g. male spider monkeys (Ateles spp.): Ramos-Fernandez, 2001). Dawkins (1985) suggests that males may be more willing to abscond than females due to a comparatively low investment in terms of reproduction. Male reproduction is limited primarily by access to fertile females (Trivers, 1972) and thus has a dominant role to play in influencing dispersal strategies. 'Female competition-conditional transfer', where male dispersal is influenced by female spatio-temporal distribution (Altmann, 1990) is therefore common. Both the orangutan (Pongo pygmaeus) (van Schaik & van hoof, 1996), and the aye-aye (Daubontonia madagascariensis) (Sterling & Rakotoarison, 1998) have been seen to travel between groups in synchrony with female fertility within groups. In contrast females follow strategies that best maximise their access to good-quality food (e.g. red colobus monkeys in Uganda: Marsh, 1979) as this determines their ability to regularly develop healthy gametes and to nourish offspring (Trivers et al., 1973).
Among group-living primates exhibiting strict dominance hierarchies low-ranking females expend excessive energy competing with high-ranking females for resources, and may disperse away from their kin to reduce these costs (e.g. rhesus macaques, olive baboons and vervet monkeys: Isbell & van Vuren, 1996). The same is true for subordinate males seeking breeding opportunities in a social system where an alpha-male dominates (de Waal, 1988). Within these systems a high risk of infanticide by the arrival of a new harem leader may drive resident females to disperse into new groups, (e.g. red colobus monkey (Colobus badius rufomitratus): Marsh, 1979). If one male cannot monopolize all females within a group, males may find it more beneficial to remain close by conspecifics (Umpathy & Kumar, 1997). Female transfer becomes obligate when males are philopatric to avoid mating with close kin and 'Male-conditional' female transfer arises. The strategy of females dispersing occurs among a small number of primate species, mainly the Great Apes (Dunbar & Cowlishaw, 2000) and two species of howler monkey (A. paliatta and A. seniculus), (Pope, 1982).
At high inbreeding loads females tend to prefer novel males as opposed to the more familiar members of their own community (Packer, 1979; Lehman & Perin, 2003). The influx of novel males to a group can therefore significantly reduce mating opportunities for resident males and immigrants often experience hostility (Cheney et al., 1986). The social costs of dispersal can be reduced if males selectively transfer with conspecifics ('peer dispersal'), or join a group including relatives, or members with whom they have previously established bonds (e.g. chacma baboons (Papio ursinus): Hamiltonal. 1976; Japanese macaques (Macaca fuscata): Kawanaka, 1973). The consequential implications of diverse migrating patterns are wide and varied in terms of gene dispersal for the individual, the social group and the species population. These are discussed below.
The central paradigm of sexual selection known as Batemans Principle theorises that males enhance their fitness by inseminating as many females as possible (Radespeil, 2002). Finding additional partners to mate with, to pass on genetic material into the next generation, is a major driving force behind male dispersal strategies. Greenwoods (1986) inbreeding avoidance hypothesis predicts that an individual 's reproductive success will be reduced at high levels of inbreeding thus promoting dispersal. The average age at first conception for a number of primate species is less than the average residence of breeding males suggesting inbreeding avoidance with fathers or close relatives among females (Clutton-Brock, 1989). Males often disperse at puberty reducing the risk of mating with close kin (Packer, 1979).
Random dispersal results in a diverse migrant pool, and maximises the breeding success of the population. Non-random dispersal by young males increases genetic similarity between groups enhancing inbreeding effects as the gene pool becomes less diverse, e.g. vervet monkeys (Cheney & Seyfarth, 1983). Fraternal migration in the absence of a continued exchange of males between groups does not appear to increase inbreeding and may be purely beneficial to the migrating individual (Cords, 1986). For example male macaques migrating in the company of peers and brothers maintain low inbreeding coefficients despite frequent dispersals (Melnick and Hoelzner, 1992). A delicate balance exists between the increase in fitness by migration with conspecifics into familiar groups, and the potential decrease in fitness caused by inbreeding (Cheney & Seyfarth, 1983). Although fraternal and peer migration elevates the degree of relatedness within and between groups new groups will always contain a lower proportion of close genetic relatives than the natal group, and thus genetic costs of non-random transfer will usually be outweighed by the benefits of joining familiar and adjacent groups (Cheney & Seyfarh, 1983). If neighbouring groups continue to exchange males for any length of time with no additional migrants entering either group, all individuals are likely to suffer a genetic cost from inbreeding depression (Melnick & Hoelzner, 1992).
The genetic consequences of dispersal patterns will influence the complex and fluid relationships within primate social groups (Dunbar & Barrett, 2000). Among sex-biased dispersers, for the sex that remains at the natal group strong bonds are often formed with close kin. For example, females that remain with their established social group to rear young secure coalitions with closely related females (Cowlishaw & Dunbar, 2000). Male philopatry promotes strong ties between "brotherhoods" of related individuals. In response to group association between related individuals gene dispersal may be restricted and the philopatric sex is often more closely related than the dispersing sex (Cowlishaw & Dunbar, 2000). For example, among six groups of long-tailed macaques in Sumatra, females were genetically more homogenous than the male members of the group (de Ruiter & Geffen, 1998) as a result of female dispersal. Coalition forming for the dispersing sex becomes less important and more relaxed social bonds exists (e.g. leaf-eating monkeys and olive baboons, Korstjens & Schippers, 2002).
When both females and males transfer regularly individuals will be less closely related to each other genetically and exhibit loser social attachments. For example, parentage among one group of Aloatran gentle lemurs (Hapalemur griseus) revealed more than 8% of paternities involved immigrant males and more than 21.21% of subadult, adult and juvenile members of one group were not related at all (Nievergeltal. 2002). An increased level of homogeneity for mitochondrial DNA may be observed between neighbouring communities (Cowlishaw & Dunbar, 2000) and inbreeding will be reduced.
Many old world monkeys live in female-bonded groups and spend their entire lives associating with related individuals within the group to which they were born (Dunbar and Barrett, 2000). In such cases homozygosity for the distribution of matrilinearly inherited mitochondrial DNA passed on from mother to daughter will be high within groups (e.g. macaques; Melnick & Hoelzer, 1992). Nuclear DNA passed on by both males and females is varied between groups where males remain (e.g. chimpanzees; Morin & Moore 1994). In populations where females are philopatric Chesser (1991) predicts the number of males contributing genes towards the next generation will directly influence the heterozygosity. Female discrimination for inbreeding avoidance thus becomes essential in breeding systems where one male dominates within group copulations (Morinal. 1994). Where females disperse a wide distribution of the male genotype across overlapping ranges may result. In the Tai Forests of Uganda, 50% of infants were sired by male chimpanzees from outside of the community as a result of females crossing boundaries to mate (Boesch, 1997).
Genetic homozygosity of a population depends primarily on the balance between migration and random changes in allele frequency, or genetic drift. For example, sumatran macaques (Macaca fascicularis) showed a reduction in heterozygosity below the level expected for random matings: De Jongal. 1994). F st is the recognized measure of relatedness between individuals indicating the level of inbreeding (Frankhamal. 2003). De Jongal. (1994) found that F st declines when only females migrate and when only males migrate. Genetic drift increases with fewer females and males contributing towards fertilisations and when only males migrate. Increasing the rate of dispersal is equivalent to increasing the number of breeding individuals and thus reduces differentiation of genes between groups further (Pope, 1996).
Gene dispersal is an important factor determining the extent of genetic structure within wild populations and is therefore an essential parameter to define optimal sampling strategies for conservation purposes (Hardy et al, 2000). On occasions gene flow can be detrimental. Where dispersal occurs between populations of different species hybrid individuals may evolve, (e.g. among five wild and captive populations of macaque species at Wantabe: Camperio et al 1989; Bartonal. 1996: Brotoisworo: Brooker et al 1999). This often causes confliction over taxonomic definitions and can have implications in identifying conservation priorities. If gene flow is limited when group size is small low heterozygosity may result between groups, e.g. ethiopian vervet monkeys (Turner, 1981). Isolation of small sub-populations will often reduce the predicted long-term probability of the species survival, e.g. the golden lion tamarin (Lentopithecus rosalia) (Dietz et al., 2000). Inbreeding will increase and the population may become genetically weak, or monotypic. For example, adult and sub adult male lion-tailed macaques (Macaca silenus) restricted from immigrating between forest fragments experienced a loss of genetic variability and inbreeding depression (Kumar, 1987). Individuals able to successfully migrate to another fragment in a degraded forest landscape assist species persistence and will have important implications on the conservation of the species population (e.g. chimpanzees, red-tailed monkeys and howler monkeys: Silver and Marsh, 2003).
The ongoing study of primate behavioural ecology is necessary in order to determine species longevity in specific areas. Among the essential behaviours to be studied are the movement patterns of individuals within and between communities (Reynolds,al. 1997). Examining species dispersal strategies is imperative for the successful design of effective biological reserves and could greatly enhance conservation efforts of species threatened with extinction. Sutherland et al (2000) hypothesized several ecological and morphological characteristics of species that may be correlated with natal dispersal distance to be used for biological conservation purposes (Mayer,al. 2002). Through these efforts we can start to make educated decisions about areas and populations that should be priorities for conservation, and aim to ensure successful strategies to preserve viable, robust populations with the ability to overcome stochastic events.
