This literature review will examine the different approaches used to tackle truancy within schools. It will in look in detail at the methodology used to research the effectiveness of such interventions. My second year placement has just been completed with the Education Social Work Service in Oxfordshire and this has given me an insight into the issues surrounding truancy and how they are being addressed. In the past few years there has been a high-profile publicity campaign and various approaches have been used to tackle truancy. However, history shows that with all the work being done the scale of school absenteeism has hardly changed. For example, in 1870 before compulsory education was introduced the school board in Leeds achieved attendance rates of 89% among children on the school roll. In comparison the attendance returns made in June 2001 indicated the attendance rates among Leeds secondary school was also 89% (Zhang 2004). In addition the unauthorised absence rates in the past ten years has remained stable at around 1% for secondary schools and 0.5% for primary schools. The latest campaign introduced by the government is a system of Fast-Track prosecution of parents. The education minister, Ivan Lewis said in 2003 "the message is clear - prosecution works" (Zhang 2004). However, this is not based on thorough academic enquiry, in fact, my literature search on this subject shows that very little research to prove this statement has been carried out.
There are further debates, which show the effectiveness of placing an Education Social Worker within the school. This tackles truancy by being readily accessible to pupils and parents and to be able to investigate the reasons behind truancy. This enables the ESW to work in partnership with other agencies to put supportive measures in place before the situation reaches crisis. In my experience on placement it was apparent that truancy cannot be addressed without investigating the wider family circumstances. It seemed that the Education Service and Social and Health Care were working in isolation and it was very difficult to enlist the help of Social and Health Care even when the family appeared to have reached crisis point. When looking at research it can be seen that truancy is a serious indicator of physio-socio education disturbance (Pritchard and Williams 2001). It can not effectively be addressed by using just one method of intervention such as the prosecution of parents. (Zhang 2004).
A thorough literature review on this subject has been carried out and seven pieces of research have been identified together with articles in Community Care and Zero2Ninteen. The following two pieces of research were found on the Dfes Website.
The methodology of this research was not clear, it only stated that data was collected from 12LEA 's over an 18-month period. There appeared to be both qualitative and quantitative data collected but I felt this paper did not go into sufficient detail for me to analyse.
This research was carried out using a telephone survey of 2000 parents/carers' but it did not specify whether this was quantitative or qualitative data that was collected.
Furthermore, as this research was carried out on behalf of the DFES and funded by them the ethical issues must be considered and, indeed, whether the findings would be impartial. For this reason these pieces have not been included in the final analysis.
The search was then widened using Caredata and the following study was found looking at a long-term approach to tackling truancy.
This was very descriptive regarding the way the scheme was used in the schools but did not give me a detailed account of the methodology used.
The following study was found when looking at the Scottish Council for Research into Education (The SCRE Centre).
This research looked at the link between truancy and pupil performance in examinations. When looking at their research questions they did not look at the approaches to tackling truancy but was purely looking at the statistical relationship. In addition it looked at the impact of the truants behaviour on other pupils and teacher 's which was not relevant to this literature review.
Having considered the above pieces of research this essay will now focus on the three remaining pieces of research. A summary of the articles will be given together with details of the methodology used. In addition the methods will be critically analysed in terms of the impact on the information generated.
This project was a school-based child and family social work service set up in four schools in Dorset (two primary and two secondary). The schools drew their pupils from the county 's most socio-economic disadvantaged areas. The hypothesis was that poverty, low intelligence and early school failure lead to truancy, lack of educational qualifications and low status jobs. The aim of the study was therefore to measure at the outset of the project and after three years, pupil 's attitudes, truancy, delinquency and school exclusion rates. For this literature review the parts of the study that relate to truancy only have been analysed. A qualified social worker worked with two schools averaging 960 pupils unlike the standard ESW potential caseload of 4000 pupils. We must be aware of the ethical issues here. The pupils who had the enhanced social work intervention were put in 'control' groups and were deliberately given a better service by the ESW than pupils at the comparative schools. (Blaxter, Hughes and Tight 2004). The first role of the social worker was to provide parental support, helping to reduce family disturbance. It involved counselling, practical advice and advocating on behalf of the pupil and family with outside agencies. The second role was to offer a consultation service to teachers.
This study was based on the collection of both qualitative and quantitative data using the post-positivism paradigm. This was achieved by using both questionnaires and interviews and was carried out primarily using fieldwork. The study used the Action Research approach, as the purpose behind the study was to try to find a way of effecting positive change with regard to truancy, delinquency and school exclusions. The purpose of action research is, always and explicitly, to improve practice. (Griffiths 1998).
There were 2000 children in this study and their attitudes and behaviour was assessed before, during, and at the end of the project using a confidential self-administered questionnaire. This was the most important form of evaluation as it was a test to see whether or not there had been a measurable change in truancy and delinquency.
The morale and stress levels of the 39 teachers involved were examined before and after the project using a modified questionnaire.
Teacher 's views of the project were explored annually via in-depth interviews (qualitative data), and in year 3 using a structured, anonymous questionnaire. However, only 25% of the teacher 's (10) were interviewed and the study did not reveal the sampling strategy.
The educational outcome was based on the results of the GCSE results in the two secondary schools (quantitative data).
The sample group in this study could not be randomised because there was no way to control the school in-take of students. In addition it did not specify the breakdown of gender, ethnicity and race within the sample. Furthermore the evaluation could not be 'blind' as many teachers in the project school had partners in the comparative schools. To minimise the 'Hawthorn effect' the researcher visited each of the comparative schools on a termly basis, which worked as a reminder that they too were being evaluated. The research methods did not specify whether the teachers were in agreement with this research being conducted or, indeed, if they were instructed to participate by the Head teacher. If, for example, the majority of teachers interviewed held the view that truancy should be dealt with purely by parental prosecution this could have a negative effect on the outcome of the research. We must also be aware of the ethical issues here. The pupils with the intervention were put into 'control' groups and deliberately given.
To ensure reliability all the question-type surveys were subjected to independent inter-rater reliability tests.
When assessing the outcome of this intervention we can look at the truancy rates in the secondary schools. The following table will show the outcomes. Bevan is the school with the on site social worker, whilst Disraeli is the comparative school receiving the normal ESW involvement.
There is no doubt there is clear indicative evidence that school based family service schools performed better than the comparative schools over the three year period. However, we must bear in mind the schools were from disadvantaged areas and this study needs to be replicated across a broad spectrum of schools to find out the real value of a school based social worker to all areas of society. Despite this research being completed in 1995 there is no move within the Education Social Work service to widen this scheme. The governments latest initiative is to prosecute parents and in particular to adhere to the 'Fast Track' process. It would therefore seem the above research, showing the effectiveness of an 'on site' qualified social worker, has been dismissed as ineffective by the current government.
The alternative to social work intervention is parental prosecution and this essay will now look at the effectiveness of this approach to truancy.
The aim of this research was to measure the effectiveness of parental prosecution with regard to lowering truancy rates and the data was collected for the period 1999-2002. An article summarising this was located in Zero2Nineteen (June 2003) using Caredata and the full research study was requested direct from the author.
The research was deskwork based only using quantitative data collected from 43 Local Education Authorities in England and Wales. However, the scale of the sample was not given, we therefore do not know how many actual prosecution cases were looked at and whether this is a sufficient representative sample. In deciding the sample, the standard grouping method of statistical neighbours was used. This ensures the sample represents the LEAs with all the different social and economic profiles. There are two continuous variables in this study (number of parental prosecutions and the change of truancy rates). To measure this the Pearson correlation coefficient was chosen as the appropriate measurement.
The results of this research were obtained using Descriptive Statistics and the information was used to test the hypothesis that parental prosecution leads to improvement in attendance and reduction in truancy.
The recorded results show correlation coefficients of negligible 0.075 and 0.074, at least 0.35 is considered statistically significant. These show there is no absolute relationship between the number of prosecutions and the levels of school absenteeism.
There was, however, one unexpected result of the correlation testing which showed there was a difference between the pupils of secondary schools and those at primary schools in terms of their response to parental prosecution. Pupils at secondary schools seem to have some positive response in terms of improved attendance whereas there is no such response from pupils at primary schools. Although still statistically insignificant (correlation coefficient = 0.296 for secondary schools, and 0.031 for primary schools), this shows the need for further research. The results of this may show that two different approaches need to be adopted depending on the age of the pupil.
Whilst being able to produce figures to suggest the prosecution of parents is not the solution to tackling truancy the research does not look at the underlying causes of truancy. It could be argued that no intervention is going to be effective until we understand the circumstances that are contributing to truancy. Research by Graham and Bowling in 1995 has shown a strong relationship between truancy and lack of parental supervision and family attachment. (Blyth and Milner 1997). It may be that more front-line services need to be put in place to support these families before we continue with Fast-Track prosecutions.
The final piece of research analysed was obtained from the National Federation of Educational Research (NFER).
This research was commissioned by the Local Government Association and was conducted between May 2002 and October 2003. The aim was to:
Analyse the prosecution process and their outcomes.
Gain the views of parents, young people and professionals.
Explore the relationship between successful outcomes and age of the child at the time of prosecution.
The research was divided into three phases collecting both qualitative and quantitative data using both fieldwork and deskwork.
Data was collected via 122 telephone interviews with Education Welfare Officers.
Face to face interviews were conducted in 12 LEAs. 12 follow-up interviews with the above Education Welfare Officers, 14 local authority staff who had responsibility for presenting cases in court. 9 Magistrates and interviews with other ESW staff (numbers not stated).
Interviews with 20 families who had been prosecuted. 13 Education Welfare Officers, 8 young people and 6 school representatives.
Although this piece of research was very comprehensive there was no indication given about the method of their sample collection with regard to age, gender, ethnicity or socio-economic group. The effectiveness of prosecution can be measured using this data, however, we must be aware of the reliability of this study as we could have very contrasting results if the sample group were different.
The confidentiality issue had been addressed by giving pseudonyms to all the parents and young people used in the study.
There were some inconsistencies between the process of prosecution in the various LEAs but in general the ESW 's were in agreement that prosecution was an effective tool. However, the process was seen as more effective in improving attendance than the actual court-related disposal or outcome. Parenting Orders and conditional discharges were seen as most effective with fines and successful prosecutions as least effective.
Furthermore, half the parents interviewed thought prosecution did not work as it did not lead to an increase in attendance, and did nothing to address the reasons for truancy. However, when looking at the number involved (20 interviewees) it can be seen that whilst 10 disagreed there were also 10 that agreed with the effectiveness of prosecutions. The sample here is possibly too small to be significant.
It can also be seen that the process of prosecution had both positive and negative effects on parents. It helped parents to reinforce their authority in the home, however, this was largely as a result of advice on parenting skills and disciplining strategies offered by the ESWs. There was also a detrimental effect on family relationships and the relationship between the ESW and the families.
Data was collected from 30 children whose parents had been prosecuted.
Thirteen were classed as effective as the post prosecution attendance levels had risen. Eleven were not effective and six cases had mixed effectiveness - there had been some increase but this was followed by a decline.
Results also show the effectiveness is dependent on the age of the child when the prosecution took place. The ESW 's felt it was more effective when dealing with younger children as later prosecutions meant that the child 's behaviour had become entrenched. This is in contrast to the previous piece of research (Zhang 2004) in which he states there are some positive response to parental prosecution of secondary school pupils. Although these two pieces of research have different views on the effectiveness of prosecution it has highlighted the possible link between the effectiveness and age of the pupil.
There is no doubt that many different approaches have been used to tackle truancy with the most recent being parental prosecution. However, the evidence from this does not show a positive relationship between prosecution and the reduction of truancy. Earlier research has shown the effectiveness of placing a qualified social worker within the school who can work in partnership with parents, pupils and other outside agencies. However, from both viewpoints there is no doubt that early intervention is essential. There is very little research into the effectiveness of parental prosecution but one factor that was highlighted in both pieces of research was the difference between primary and secondary school pupils. It is clear therefore that further research is needed to find out whether the attendance legislation needs to be amended to take into account the child 's age.
