Equity is defined as the idea of fairness and impartiality (Hawkins 1991) and has been a primary goal of the NHS since its establishment in 1948. However research such as The Black report and Widening the gap have revealed an ever increasing difference in standards regarding the health of our nation in a time where Britain has never been more prosperous, recommendations have been made from a number of these reports as well as Saving lives our healthier nation. A number of theories and factors must be explored to determine why these inequalities exist and how this would affect any decisions regarding the distribution of services to the population to achieve equity. I have chosen to look at the history of the NHS and health care in Britain, scope of sociological enquiry and finally the variations and inequalities in health.
Inequalities have always existed when looking at the access to and experiences of health care. At the beginning of the century there were no government previsions' regarding medical treatment, health care was mainly primary care, being provided by practitioners acting as businesses, and being treated in your own home or the community (Malone 1998). For the poor this care was preformed potentially by someone who was not even trained, being subjected to dubious and potentially dangerous "cures" or maybe the charity of a doctor (NHS website). Where as those better off in society could afford the treatment of a qualified doctor, this combined with increased likely hood of better sanitary conditions lead to a grater survival rate and therefore longer life expectancy. (Lane 2001 no 2) The introduction of the national insurance act of 1911 was beneficial to a larger number of the population but the system still remained out of reach for a large proportion being women, children and the elderly, men outside the 16-70 age bracket that qualified them for national insurance, those worker who earned a slightly wage were also penalised (Lane 2001). The care that was received was also dependent on the part of the country in which you lived due to availability of jobs (Malone 1998). Access to health care finally became more equitable at the end of WWII, the country 's hospitals capacity had already increased to deal with the injured in the war and the need for an extensive health system was beginning to be recognised. In 1942 Beveridge began to create a blue print for a post war service and finally in 1948 the NHS was first implemented and set out to be a "comprehensive health service" (pg 113 Purdy 2001) with "equal access being fundamental principle" (pg 68 Townsend 1982) as now everyone was supposed to be entitled to treatment and priority was not affected by a social divide, employment, finance or related to gender as when the national insurance act was in place. The services provided by the NHS were meant to give "equal expenditure for equal need" and every one was supposed to have equal rights to the same health. It was though his could be achieved but the different lifestyles and needs of the population proved otherwise (Malone N 1998). The inequalities regarding health can begin at an early stage as people are not born with equal health, those from lower social classes have increased chances of having a baby with a lower birth weight and increased chance of their baby being born prematurely, this is very likely to cause lasting effects on the health and development of the child (Townsend 1982) causing a vicious circle where unhealthy parents are more likely to have unhealthy children and so on. The initial idea of the NHS was to reduce health care costs by improving the general health of the nation; it was believed that as health improved the NHS would turn into a low cost preventive service staying below the allocated budget set aside for this purpose (Lane J 2001) however the outcome of the service was actually costs that were spiralling out of control. This can be related to the demands of the population as health improved services were required by greater numbers as mortality rates fell, newer more expensive drugs became available on the market, medicine was advancing at a pace unthought-of and under increased strain due to the influence of a growing aging population (Malone 1998). This lead to careful monitoring in the 1950 's and it was realised that a huge underestimation had been made at the extent of the backlog of patients who were all taking full advantage of the free dental treatment, spectacles, dentures and even wigs (Lane 2001). Cut backs had to be made and the availability of these services were reduced by introducing charges therefore, once again, access to certain services was limited to those with greater financial incomes, suggested by the 66 percent fall in use of the dental service as charges were introduced (NHS website), contradicting the NHS policy that had only been in place for a few years that health care was going to be comprehensive and free to all. How ever the inequalities did not end there to try and offset the ever increasing cost of drugs which were being over prescribed prescription charges were brought in as a temporary measure, but in fact was never abandoned. It was finally recognised that a free and comprehensive health service was never going to be achieved (Lane 2001). In the mid 1970 's the NHS was perceived to be in crisis, Castle talked of plans to scrap pay beds and caused uproar (Carvel 2001) When the Black report was published in 1982 it comprised a list of recommendations that needed to be undertaken to improve the health of the nation, especially targeting those who were in the lower social classes however the government claimed that there was not enough money to implement the recommendations (Townsend 1982). Titmuss (Townsend pg 19 1982) argued along the same lines that money needed to be put aside to deal with the social side of ill health, namely the preventative services dealing with people whilst they were still healthy and rehabilitating back into the community, to make the population healthier as a whole, not just treat patients when they fall ill, this would ultimately lower the costs of the NHS. In the 1990 's new ideas came about that were supposed to return power to local areas, the NHS was finally decentralised and it was believed that individual needs would be better met, studies showed that the population was still not receiving services that were needed, and so the battle for equality continues.
Health and illness are difficult to define as we all have different expectations of life therefore it is a "subjective experience" (Lecture 2) that relates specifically to the person. Who 's definition of health (Bond and Bond 1989 pg116) as "the state of complete physical, mental and social well being not merely the absence of disease and infirmity" is obviously not one that applies to every one as we all have different expectations of quality of life, suggested by the different expressive terms for health used by the higher social groups (expressed positively) or those in lower social classes in negative terms (D'Houtard 1984). When reasons behind the likelihood of individuals seeking treatment for being "sick" are looked at it appears the idea of what is sick is much clearer to those who define sickness in society such as doctors and researchers (Doyal cited in Purdy 2001) this could be related to their use of the medical model, basing illness purely on the physical sciences, defining illness when patients display certain signs of symptoms (Bond and Bond 1986). Newall (2003 pg 17) suggests that this model separates the mind and the body in treatment. By expecting everyone to, in essence to police themselves and know and understand when something is wrong (Purdy 2001) and adhere to certain life style choices is not fair to those who are denied a basic scientific knowledge and have lower expectations of health, these tend to be people who are from lower social classes and are more likely to have social habits that damage their health. The black report (Townsend 1982) also suggests that the members of lower social class tend to make less use of services intended to prevent poor health for both themselves and their children placing them in an even more disadvantaged situation. The lay concepts of health although thought of as not as well medically educated are based on when an individual assesses that something is wrong with themselves. But in society views of heath and what is normal varies between groups such as social class, gender and culture. Ill has been defined as "symptoms that are seen as abnormal by family and friends and the individual themselves" (Zola cited in Helman pg 114). People who belong to lower social groups or those who work in manual jobs are likely to count symptoms such as backache and extreme tiredness as "normal" (Helman 1990). Another reason why they are perhaps not taking full advantage of medical services available to them Wilkinson (1996) suggests that it is these differences in assessing ones health that make it necessary to use death as an indicator not illness. However the social aspect also has to be addressed, those from lower social groups are increasingly likely to be employed within professions that do not help to off set costs that may be incurred from using the health services such as sick pay, longer holidays and time off to visit health professionals (Bartley Met al cited in Purdy 2001) Therefore they are increasingly likely to ignore symptoms and take less advantage of screening services. If living in an area were every one is in the same situation there is more sickness and death the problem amplify, waiting lists increase, there is less hospital support and they are les clinically effective, doctors also have to shoulder more case loads with more work therefore health care access and quality decreases (Townsend 1982). Thee problems can be avoided by those who have financial means as private care is always an option and rapid access to better quality health can be achieved.
Women 's experiences of health both regarding lifestyle, experiences of and treatment received by health practitioner shows great variations when compared to that of males of the same age. Research has shown that women are more likely to approach and access various medical services (the need for birth control and process of reproduction must be taken into account for these higher figures (Doyal, L cited in Purdy 2001)) when compared to men who are much more likely to miss appointments and examinations (White 2002). Whilst in consultation with a medical practitioner woman are much more likely to report how they feel not merely physical symptoms when compared to men, possibly as a result of socialisation (Purdy 2001) an outcome of this is women are much less likely to receive treatment for physical problems and instead are twice as likely to receive treatment for mental health disorders (Helman 2000). It is suggested this is also due to influences of the pharmaceutical companies who portray these types of medication as solutions for women 's health instead of dealing with the actual problems in hand. Men on the other hand are more likely to turn to drink and drugs as solutions for depression and mental problems (Helman 2000). As a result when these women are finally treated for an illness they are older, sicker and treatment is less efficient. The influence of perceived roles in the community also affects women 's health. They are still regarded as the primary health carer 's for over half of Britain 's elderly and infirm and this is seen as a normal event in society (Wall A and Owen B 2002). The impact of this role has an "enormous impact on their own health and well being" (Opie cited in Purdy 2001 pg 133) and women frequently report a lower "health related quality of life" (Lacey E, A 2003 pg 624). This can lead to a feeling of panic and despair at the thought of being ill or taking time out as they feel they do not have time to be sick as everyone is relying or depending on them. In a survey women from poorer households have regularly cut back on their own previsions to ensure adequate food and clothing was available for her family (Graham 1984). Despite this, perhaps women have a longer life expectancy due to the contact had with medical services though out her life, taking those she cares for to health professionals and the increased screening programs for diseases such a breast and cervical cancer.
The government 's attempt to provide equity for delivery of services to all is very difficult as many inequalities exist within societies that affect health and therefore services that are required. These can cover a broad spectrum including areas such as the psychological factors self esteem, job satisfaction and support and physical factors therefore individual needs have to be explored when regarding health care. Although no one factor is thought to have a detrimental effect on health when factors are combined inequalities can be clearly seen (Wilkinson 1996). This is demonstrated in the socioeconomic model of health, it shows the main detriments to health can be divided into layers all providing their own impact on the health of the individual. The innermost layer of the model is constructed by personal lifestyle choices such as smoking, exercising and diet as well as age and gender. The community lived in and personal relationships provide the next layer of the model, wider influences such as occupation, living conditions availability of resources such as shops, recreational facilities make up the third layer and finally (Purdy 2001) " General socioeconomic, cultural and environmental conditions which make up the final layer" ( Purdy pg 112). These effects can be seen clearly when looking at the geographical influence on health known as the north south divide which is still very much apparent, mortality rates in the north are shown to be higher for almost every main cause of death when compared to the south (Shaw et al cited in Bartley 1998). There are debates that the divide is actually still increasing when compared to data taken in the 1950 's (Phillimore et al cited in Purdy 2001). The cause of social differences when related to geography can be explained by the predominately industrial workforce present in the north who 's employee 's and families are more likely to be rated as a lower social scale V or 1V and therefore experience more economic depravation when compared to those in areas in the south of England who are more likely to be grade 1 (Graham H 2000). Skrimshire (1978) suggests that a working class person was also at a greater disadvantage if living in a predominantly working class area than a mixed area so location has an affect on a person 's health. (Bartley et al 1998 The Black report (1982) reports that men and their wives in social class V are two and a half times more likely to die before retirement that those in social class 1.
When looking at possible factors that cause such extremes between social class and health I feel the cultural/ behavioural explanation which compares differences in areas such as diet and fitness and habits such as smoking in different social classes the and the materialist explanation which compares effects of social factors such as housing, income, the freedom of being able to take holidays and unemployment on health are particularly relevant. Although diseases such as TB and diphtheria which are linked with poverty and lack of material goods have diminished, different diseases have taken their place which are actually associated with wealth (Whitehead 1982) and are though of as environmental causes with increases in smoking, poor diet and drinking giving rise to diseases such as coronary heart disease, lung cancer and obesity (Wilkinson 1996). However those who make their homes in the north and are lower social class are still more likely to be affected when compared to those in the south east who are more likely to be wealthier. When a downstream campaign to prevent smoking was launched it was shown that those who had more satisfaction with the quality of their lives gave up more readily and more willingly, suggesting that self esteem and the feeling of being in control affects health and the ability to lead a healthier lifestyle suggesting the importance of the psychological aspects in our society. When materialist aspects are looked at there is shown to be a positive correlation between the lack of material goods i.e. access to a car, owing a house and relation to higher death rates (Wilkinson 1996). This suggests that employment is also a factor that affects health when one is unselectively made unemployed health actually deteriorates (Wilkinson 1996) equally in unskilled job that offers little security stress levels are shown to increase and the likely hood of picking up infections is also increased.
Although the NHS has a policy of "equal expenditure for equal needs" (Malone N pg 327 1998) this does not appear to be the case. The 'inverse care law' (Tudor Hart cited in Purdy) suggests that although these are the areas where health care is at its greatest requirement its population actually receive the least help, the richer more educated also take greater advantage of schemes and programs designed to help those less well off (Townsend 1982) Inequality does not end there it the treatment that is received in wealthier areas is also not equal expenditure as the average cost per prescription was higher in those areas where the patients had more money (Martin et al Townsend 1982).
Although health care has improved tremendously over the last century and we are all experiencing longer healthier lives and access to high quality medical care is available the achievement of equity between all regarding health care has been sadly unachievable as the as the health and social gaps continue to increase over the years, between not only geographical differences but also between gender and ethnicity. These factors clearly still affect access to and experience of the health services in current day despite a number of publications. Wilkinson R (pg 68 1996) suggests that the government can only have a "superficial impact on social and economic structure, health inequalities have their roots in much deeper and more permanent features" suggesting that until the psychosocial aspects of society are also dealt with nothing can really change, It is suggested that death rates are still more related to social class than medical care variables (Wilkinson 1996). So if poor health is determined by society, "we as a society could improve health care by improving conditions of life of the population" (Purdy 2001 pg 3). The government has shown it is attempting to tackle the underlying social problems of the population. An example being the attempt to abolish potential inequalities for children earlier by the introduction of the policy for abolishing child poverty, this was a goal set for the 1980 's how ever it is now a goal set for the next few years (Townsend 1982). Perhaps the achievement of equity is coming closer but we need to accept it will be another few years in the making.
