Explanatory research question: Which is the most effective treatment method for someone with rheumatoid arthritis of the hand when trying to increase or maintain range of movement and muscle strength? Exercises on their own, or exercises with the use of a resting splint.
This is a fixed experimental design i.e. it is theory driven with the variables and procedures to be followed specified in advance. The purpose of the enquiry is explanatory; seeking to identify relationships between aspects of phenomena (Robson, 2002).
Null hypothesis: when treating rheumatoid arthritis of the hand to maintain or increase range of movement and muscle strength there is no difference in the effectiveness of exercises on their own or exercises with the use of a resting splint.
Alternate hypothesis: when treating rheumatoid arthritis of the hand to maintain or increase range of movement and muscle strength there is a difference in the effectiveness of exercises on their own or exercises with the use of a resting splint.
Sample size: 150.
Determined with the use of a power calculation which will ensure the study sample size has enough statistical power to detect if the intervention has made a significant difference, if one is found (Depoy & Gitlin, 2002). The power calculation takes into account any factors that can affect the sensitivity of the study when identifying relationships (Robson, 2002).
Inclusion and exclusion criteria have been decided to define a specific population that will be investigated. It is critical to select a sample that is representative of the population to allow the findings to be generalized to the wider population from which the sample has been drawn (Depoy & Gitlin, 1998).
These criteria have been decided to identify people, who have experienced the disease for some time, yet it is not yet severely developed, it is stable and manageable. They aim to exclude those who have a severe form or the disease in its' late stages, therefore not including people who may have a low response to the treatments. This intends to define a population for who the course of treatment would be relatively new to enable the study to define which type of treatment is best to start out with when treating rheumatoid arthritis of the hand.
Participants who fit these criteria will be given an information leaflet on the trial when they visit the hand clinic. If after reading the information provided and any further questions have been answered effectively they wish to take part they will be asked to return a form of consent at their next visit.
The 2 interventions being compared are:
Exercises for each intervention will follow the same program, these and use of the splint will devised by a senior occupational therapist (O.T). Three O.T 's will then be instructed on how to implement this intervention in order to ensure each participant can be seen weekly. Splints will be given out to participants in treatment group 2 and instruction given on when and how to use them. The aim of the splint is to prevent joints from going out of shape overnight and allowing the person to continue activities whilst resting the painful joint (Unsworth, 1986).
The aim of the trial is to see whether use of the splint makes a difference in treatment outcome, or whether it is just as successful without one.
Data will be collected at baseline by a self-completed questionnaire, measures to be included in the questionnaire are:
Outcome measures to be used are:
Range of movement - measured using goniometry; a short arm and a finger goniometer to measure range of movement at the wrist and MCP joints.
Muscle strength - masured using the Grip Ability Test (GAT), this is a valid, reliable clinical hand function test. It is easy to perform and has a good inter- and intra-observer reliability, correlating well with performance of ADL tasks (Dellhag, 2000).
These will be taken by an independent researcher with sufficient knowledge of using these tests at baseline and at 12 weeks. Part 6 of the self-completed questionnaire will also be repeated at 12 weeks to detect any changes in the patient 's perspective of their condition; this gives a qualitative aspect to the study design.
Therefore this project has a pre-test post-test two treatment comparison design (Robson, 2002).
Randomization: the participants will be allocated by computer to the 2 treatment groups, known as treatment group 1 and treatment group 2, using stratified random sampling to reduce the variability in each subgroup. As there is a 3:1 female preponderance in this condition (Snaith, 1996), proportionate stratified sampling will be used so that the sample represents the proportions as they exist in the population (Depoy & Gitlin, 1998).
Blinding: given the nature of the trial it is impossible to blind the participants or the O.T 's carrying out the treatment as to what treatment is being received. Therefore all outcome measures will be performed by an independent researcher who will not know which group the participant has been allocated to. Each participant will have been given a number at the start of the trial which they will give to the independent researcher rather than their name. The researcher will wait in a separate room for the participants to be shown through by the O.T. on duty; participants will be instructed not to take their splint into this room if in treatment group 2. This means single blinding will be used, also the use of an independent researcher will help rule out any researcher bias as they are unlikely to have any interest in the outcome of the trial.
Generalizability: refers to the extent to which the findings of the enquiry are more generally applicable (Robson, 2002). With a sample size of 150 from one clinic only, it is unlikely that the results will be wide enough to generalize over the whole population. However they will still be large enough to draw valid findings that can be used to inform further research. Due to the use of inclusion and exclusion criteria the population under investigation is only a slice of the population of patients at the clinic, this will further decrease the ability to generalize the results.
Data will be collected and put into a computer table. The trial will produce interval data, this is numbers that have real value and meaning they cannot be substituted for anything else such as symbols, therefore this requires the use of a parametric test. The analysis will be looking for differences between the 2 sets of data, one variable is present (use of a splint), there are 2 experimental groups with different subjects in each resulting in an unrelated t-test to be used in the analysis; this has been decided upon by using a decision chart (Greene, 1999).
Confidence intervals will be calculated for the mean of each outcome measure for each group. These will be used to ensure any differences detected are meaningful and did not occur by chance.
The information gathered from section 6 of the self completed questionnaires will be used to detect if the splint affects the participants perspective of their condition. Themes will be drawn from the data, the researcher will look for any reoccurring themes within the groups and compare the two sets of data to detect any differences.
There is a duty to work in a way that minimizes the prospect of research having an adverse effect on those who are involved (Denscombe, 2002), therefore:
After each participant has read the initial information leaflet and agreed to take part in the trial they will be asked to sign an informed consent form of which both the participant and the researcher will retain a copy.
Confidentiality will be ensured by using participant numbers throughout the trial.
Any information retained by the researcher will be kept in a secure place within the hand clinic, information containing names i.e. informed consent forms, will be kept separately to the rest of the study data.
The risk of harm when taking part in this trial is minimal, some may feel that the participants in treatment group 1 are disadvantaged as they do not receive the splint, however as neither treatment is proven better than the other this is not a fact. Also each participant will have entered into the trial of their own freewill so this is a component each will have considered.
Dellhag, B. (2000). Hand function in rheumatoid arthritis. Scandinavian Journal of Occupational Therapy, 7 (3), 140-140. Retrieved November, 19, 2004, from.
Denscombe, M. (2002). Ground rules for good research: a 10 point guide for social research. Open University Press: Buckingham.
Depoy, E., & Gitlin, L. N. (1998). Introduction to research: Understanding and applying multiple strategies. (2 nd ed.). Mosby: St. Louis.
Greene, J., & D'Olivera. (1999). Learning to use statistical tests in psychology. Open University Press: Milton Keynes.
Robson, C. (2002). Real world research. (2 nd ed.). Blackwell Publishing: Oxford.
Snaith, M. (Ed.). (1996). ABC of rheumatology. BMJ Publishing Group: London.
Unsworth, H. (1986). Coping with rheumatoid arthritis. Chambers: Edingborough.
Using the strategy of grounded theory, this study aims to generate a theory from data that is collected during the study relating to the research focus (Robson, 2002). There is no general principle or truth regarding the subject of the study at present, the aim of this research is to search for and identify general rules or patterns by linking specific findings from the data collected; this is inductive reasoning (Depoy & Gitlin, 1998).
Due to the nature of the research study a qualitative design is considered to be the most appropriate, the purpose of the research is the discovery of social theory rather than the testing of it (Denscombe, 2002). A qualitative procedure allows assessment of unquantifiable facts about the people that the researchers talk to (Berg, 2001). The questions are designed to be exploratory as they are seeking to find out new insights and what is happening in the area of treatment of rheumatoid arthritis of the hand (Robson, 2002).
Research focus: this research aims to examine the behaviour of people following an exercise and splinting regime for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis of the hand.
From this general focus 2 research questions have been defined as:
Research questions:
Why is it that some people follow the regime provided by their therapist whilst others do not?.
Why is it that some people always attend their appointments whilst others do not?.
The first question aims to collect information regarding any changes that could be made to the program that would increase compliance. The second question aims to collect information regarding the accessibility of appointments and how this could be increased.
This study uses a flexible design therefore it is not possible to predetermine the sample size. Between 20-30 individuals from the hand clinic following an exercise and splinting regime for rheumatoid arthritis of the hand will be interviewed; a number typical of this type of study (Robson, 2002). In research that is exploratory it becomes impossible to say precisely at the start how many and exactly who will be the focus of the study (Denscombe, 2002). The final sample size will be determined once saturation is reached, this refers to the point at which no further insights or understanding are being gained from the information being gathered (Depoy & Gitlin, 1998). The type of sampling being used is known as theoretical sampling, where the people interviewed are chosen to help the researcher formulate theory, rather than using random sampling of a specific population to achieve statistical generalizability (Robson, 2002).
As this study focuses on the perceptions of the participants and the meaning of the research focus to the participants, interviewing presents to be the most useful means of data collection (Berg, 2001). The use of a focus group has been decided against as confidentiality can be a problem between participants, the number of questions covered is limited and there is likelihood of extreme views predominating or less articulate participants not sharing their views (Robson, 2002). Therefore data will be collected using individual semi-structured interviews. An advantage of interviews is their adaptability, the interviewer is able to follow up ideas, investigate motives and responses something which a questionnaire cannot do (Bell, 1999). Semi-structured interviews have been chosen as they represent a purposeful and focussed approach to asking (Depoy & Gitlin, 1998) yet still allow a degree of flexibility. There will be predetermined questions, however the interviewers' perception of what seems most appropriate for the particular interviewee can be used to modify the order or wording of these as well of as allowing particular questions to be added or omitted (Robson, 2002). There may be a more structured part to the interview at the beginning to gather demographic details, this will then lead onto the more unstructured part of the interview using open-ended questions; these allow the interviewer to go into depth, they can also produce unexpected or unanticipated results (Robson, 2002). Interviews will be carried out in a quiet room free from distractions, drinks will be available and comfortable seating to ensure the participant is comfortable and at ease. All interviews will be conducted by the same researcher to ensure they are all carried out in the same manner. The interview will be audio taped, a fundamental data recording strategy (Depoy & Gitlin, 1998). Notes will be taken during the interview as part of a fail safe in the case of problems with the tape recordings. The interview will be transcribed afterwards for further analysis. Certain issues need to be kept in mind when interviewing, all interviews are subjective therefore there is always the risk of bias (Bell, 1999), they are also time consuming both for the researcher and the participant.
An interview schedule provides a list of things for the interviewer to be sure of asking when talking to the participant (Lofland & lofland, 1995 as cited in Robson, 2002). "Selitzal. (1959), Spradley (1979), Patton (1980), and Polit and Hungler (1993) suggest that researchers begin with a kind of outline, listing all the broad categories they feel may be relevant to their study" (Berg, 2001, p.74). Once these have been decided questions relevant to each category can be developed forming the interview schedule. This will be critically examined by others who are expert in the focus topic of the study, doing this will help to rule out or identify any poorly worded questions, questions revealing researcher bias, personal values or blind spots (Berg, 2001). After this several practice interviews will be carried out to determine the effectiveness of the interview in obtaining the information it intends to gather.
To increase the truth value an audit trail will be used, this allows others to follow the decision making process followed throughout the study (Depoy & Gitlin, 1998). It is central to the acceptance and testing of new theory by scientific communities that replication and reproducibility are possible (Berg, 2001). Audio taping of the interviews means that detail of the precise words spoken in the interview will not be lost, allowing repeated review and examination of the information (Denscombe, 2002).
All participants will be sent the transcripts and interpretations drawn from their individual interview, known as member checking this is a valuable means of guarding against researcher bias (Robson, 2002).
Data will be analysed using the method of constant comparison, a repeated comparison of information gathered from data collection and emerging theory (Robson, 2002). Transcripts and audiotapes from each interview will be transformed into meaningful categories and themes that explain the patterns of the phenomena under investigation, these will be peer checked and member checked to rule out researcher bias. Recurring themes that emerge from the data will be organinsed into broader categories, each category being numbered and each sub-theme being numbered creating an index. This numbering will then be applied to the data enabling it to be coded. This is using the frameworks approach of developing a thematic framework, this is a systematic approach allowing the researcher to identify relationships between the emerging themes thus developing theory (Ritchie et al, 2003 as cited in Ezekiel, 2004).
The responsibility of moral conduct throughout this study lies with the researcher (Denscombe, 2002). Participants will be invited to join the study by letter to their home and information posters in the hand clinic. All participants must be willing to talk to the researcher for up to an hour and be tape recorded. Informed consent will be gained from each participant prior to interviewing. All participants will be anonymous by use of participant numbers, no names will be mentioned in the interviews or on the tape recordings. Only the researcher will have details of the participant 's details, which with the transcripts and tape recordings will be kept in a secure location within the hand clinic.
Results will be fed back to the participants by post before publication, therefore if there are any objections to the findings these can be discussed and amended as necessary.
