Natasha Randall describes the arrival of the World Wide Web as a new tool for market growth that itself has grown into "the most effective consumer weapon ever created". The article discusses the issue of Google Print and its threat to the publishing industry, as it makes book content available, electronically, online. Natasha states "They are just filling the gap in cyberspace where publishers should have been all along", but reminds us that Google is just a search engine that is heading for redundancy as the internet becomes overloaded with non regulated material. Once Googles digitalisation project is complete, material in library collections will be accessible by anyone with an Internet connection, believed to be the problem, rather than GooglePrint for Publishers.
Derek Johns, president of the AAA, expresses publisher 's hope that "Search inside the Books will foster book sales". The AAA believes it is not necessary to allow Amazon have to full electronic versions of books, for consumers to search and buy, because it is a promotional use and they should therefore be restricted to the amount of material they can use. Derek Johns moves onto shared fears about Google Print, unsure whether it s in the authors' interests, "The AAA believe that no electronic files should be given to Amazon, or any third party like Google, without the authors' prior written consent". This clearly expresses the concern about unauthorised uses and a fall in sales, without established controls and restrictions.
This article discusses Tom Turvey, "Strategic Partner Development Manager", and his update on the announcement in October 2004 of the Google Print project. "We're now collecting and processing data from publishers for the UK site which we aim to launch this year". Meaning, when searching for a book using Google, there will be added book information and links to online booksellers, within the search results. Taking into account copyright worries, Turvey explains they have installed security measures like disabling save and copy functions and restricting the number of pages you can move through onscreen.
Turvey mentions competition from Amazon with their 'Search inside a book' feature, but describes Googles difference as attracting "readers outside the traditional channels" and that all major publishers are participating.
The Authors Guild, based in New York, are suing Google for copyright infringement due to the Google Print project. Google Print is an online book and content, search engine. The Guild want to protect writers interests by demanding that Google be stopped from digitising books, so that the authors remain in control of how their books are reproduced. Google claims that it restricts what text is available to search through but believes that having this content available is a marketing tool to increase book sales. The Guild argues that Google do not need the full text in this case and are infringing copyright by reproducing full versions for themselves.
Google have now stopped the project of scanning in-copyright books until November.
In this article, Alison Bone comments on the number of new book titles being published reaching and all time high. This year out put has increased by 11%.
According to Neilsen Book Data (NBD) between January and July this year, 114,669 new titles were published. Last year the figures stood at 104,000 and Michael Healy thinks they will hit 200,000 by the year-end.Print on Demand is thought to be one of the biggest contributors to this rise as it has made publishing so inexpensive and Jon Howels at Ottakars has commented on the increase in demand for academic titles.
Large publishers, like Random House Group, are claiming they are reducing their lists but the new title figures continue to rise.
The article discusses the moves of major booksellers to Internet retail, mainly focussing on Amazon, who both Borders and Waterstones sell through. Ottakars has decided to try retailing online once more, after abandoning it 4 years ago. WH Smith retails in its own right, where as Borders and Waterstones are locked "into a strategic cul-de-sac", though at least Borders is making a profit now after being stung with Borders.com. Waterstones claims it is more profitable to retail through Amazon because of the flexibility allows it to invest into its high street stores. The article then questions whether Amazon will over take Waterstones and WH Smith in the next 10 years and how Ottakars will fare when it returns to online retail in 2006.
August 2005 saw the launch of a new, American website called 'Lulu'. The website states that it is "the worlds fastest growing provider of print on demand books".
Bob Young originally set up the website in 2002. The idea behind it was to allow writers to independently publish by selling directly to the consumer. 'Lulu', meaning "remarkable person", takes commission on every book sale so there is no registration fee for the author. The author remains in complete control of the rights to their work and gets to choose the royalty they will receive.
The website is growing in content quickly because it is uploading in the region of 3,000 new titles a month. They currently have more than 20,000 titles available online.
Since 2005, new title figures have doubled as almost 540 new titles are being published each day.
New print on demand technology is considered to be responsible for making it cheaper to publish and the article questions whether the book trade is in danger of drowning due to the steep increase of new titles. It is thought that the benefit of this is that there is more chance of discovering great writers, but the worry is that physical booksellers can not stock and display the mass of new books in their stores like the Internet can.
By 2020 it is estimated that one million new titles will be produced each year which means the amount of authors will be frightening.
John Carey talks about the difficulty of selecting winning authors for the Man Booker Prize and the delight that half of the shortlist for the prize do write in other languages . The prize is aimed at bringing cultures together and making readers aware of new writers and their works. The article moves onto the translation of literature and how a book is disqualified from the Man Booker prize if an English translation is not available or gone out of print. To someone outside the publishing industry, it looks like the industry is trying to stop us reading books in different languages. It is hoped that British Publishers can turn this trend, of depriving English-speaking readers of foreign works, around.
Alison Bone begins with the shortlist for the Man Booker prize and comments on the attention from the media this time due to the exclusion of winners from the past. Some booksellers have struggled to stock enough copies of the short-listed books. The demand is reflected in the rising sales figures, with the winners expecting sales of at least "tenfold" in the week the winner is announced and so the publishers will hold back on paperback publication dates until they know the winner.
The article moves onto the importance of the Man Booker Prize. Commercially it is n't the most important prize, "but in literary terms it is still the best" (David Hayden, 2005), and you can not always predict who will win.
The Booker Prize was set up in 1968 by Booker Plc and is currently sponsored by The Man Group until next year.
Winning the Man Booker Prize is thought to be the peak of an author 's career. The winner receives   50,000 and the short listed writers usually achieve a big boost in sales since the book world 's eyes have been on them at the build up to the announcement. This year the competition has been really strong, with over 100 nominations, and it has been difficult for the judges to narrow the list down. One judge comments, "If we could make cars as well as we make novels, we would be like the Japanese"(John Sutherland, Times Literary Supplement).
Robert McCrum wrote this article ten days before the announcement of the Man Booker Prize winner and claims that this year the prize has failed to excite its world wide audience. John Sutherland was expected to "inject some much needed pizzazz" but has failed to do so.
Robert McCrum talks about the prize favouring younger people over the elderly because of the creativity going into fiction in more recent times. A lot of young writers are publishing in their thirties. McCrum expresses that betting on the favourite to win will not give much of a return and that he may place a side bet on writers like the Smiths because there is always a chance a back runner could take the prize.
Having analysed twelve articles about current issues in the publishing industry, it is clear to see that the last few years have seen some major changes.
The number of new books being published each year is growing. Between January and July 2005, figures saw "an increase of 11% on the same period in 2004"(Alison Bone, The Bookseller, 9/9/2005). Article 8 questions whether the book trade will be able to cope with the amount of new titles being published and suggests that print on demand technology has been a main factor, "It 's now so inexpensive to become a publisher" (Michael Healy, The Bookseller, 9/9/2005). So many new authors has effected The Booker Prize making it difficult to cut the long list down to a short list, making it difficult for book sellers to display these titles. During the build up to the announcement, the demand for the shortlist books is noticeable in the rise in sales figures. "the winners expecting sales of at least "tenfold" in the week the winner is announced" (Alison Bone, Bookseller, Issue 5196, 16/September/2005). This year the competition has reach 109 nominations for the prize. According to Robert McCrum (Observer, 2/10/05) "The prize has generated neither excitement nor controversy", seeming to suggest that the competition is now so diverse, it has become a bit dull, but is clearly still important to the industry because of the way it effects sales. Booksellers like Waterstones and Borders have turned to online retail like Amazon and Google Print. Google launched this project in October 2004 with the aim to make every book content available digitally online. Issues have arisen over copyright as talked about in article 4. The Authors Guild demand they want to protect writers interests by suing Google for copyright infringement. In article 3, Google fights back with its talk about security measures against piracy and copyright by disabling the copy and paste function and restricting the number of pages the consumer can move through. But publishers query why Google is requesting full texts, if these restrictions mean the full text is not available in the public domain. Amazons similar project, "Search inside the Book", has booksellers, for example Waterstones, already retailing through them. Waterstones believes " its Amazon tie-up gives a cost effective flexibility" (The Bookseller, 1/7/05), meaning it has the freedom to invest in its high street stores and not just have its capital tied up in one retail outlet. The problem with Amazon and similar online retailers is that they are selling books at discounted prices and undercutting the physical booksellers. They also promote 'used and new' items on the same web page, so the consumer can see a much cheaper used copy of the book at the same time as looking at the new title. The worry is that consumers will opt for the cheaper option, which means that the author and publisher do not receive any payment. From another perspective, an important point is that Amazon gives a quick and straightforward way of finding older titles. This helps with back-list sales, and it can cope with the increase in new titles because it has a limitless amount of pages, unlike the limited amount of display shelves in a bookshop.
Over all, the key issues are based around technology. Print on Demand means capital does n't have to be tied up in stock, therefore it is more cost effect. But this has a knock on effect, as more publishers emerge. More publishers mean more books and more booksellers struggling to display them. More books also means more competition for The Booker Prize and similar awards which over the next five years looks likely to grow. This may make the Booker Prize seem less important as the increased number of authors dilutes the Booker Prize status. Technological advances mean fast, efficient turn around which pressure booksellers to turn to online retail. Over the next 5 years, the publishing industry looks set to follow the online retail trend.
