Within the hospitality industry, there are clear examples of standardisation. This essay will explore the concept of standardisation and how it affects the hospitality industry, with focus on one particular sector and sub-sector, restaurants and more specifically, the fast food industry. It will consider the alternatives to standardisation that an organisation might use and the benefits and problems of both methods. The advantages and disadvantages of standardisation for both customers and staff will be discussed and it will ultimately seek to answer the original question; does standardisation give customers less choice and demotivate staff?.
In order to address this question, it is first necessary to define standardisation. The Oxford English Dictionary Online defines standardisation as "to bring to a standard or uniform size, strength, form of construction, proportion of ingredients, or the like". More specifically Taylor (1999) in Wood (2000) defines standardisation in food and beverage operations. He suggests that established routines and processes are used to provide uniform outputs every time. Therefore, standardisation in the hospitality industry ensures that a product or service is the same every time it is delivered to a customer. For example, customers who go into McDonald 's will expect the Big Mac they receive to be identical to the Big Mac they received the last time they went in, and the time before that. The opposite of standardisation would be differentiation or customisation. Taylor (1999) in Wood (2000) defines differentiation as "those processes and outputs where efficiency, calculability, predictability, control and substitution of human labour by non-human labour are absent". So, differentiation is when the products or services are not always the same, meaning that the system used is likely to be inefficient because something different is being done every time. Brotherton (1997) defines customisation as when a company tailors its products to meet the needs of a variety of consumer groups. In the hospitality industry it would be difficult to get complete customisation. Products have to be standardised in some way so customers know what to expect and can rely on the quality of a product or service.
The main reason that standardisation exists in the hospitality industry is so that businesses can gain economies of scale. A business can save money by buying products in bulk, using systems that provide the same output each time and replacing labour with technology (Taylor, 1999 in Wood 2000). By applying these processes to their operations, a company can reduce its costs by becoming more efficient and benefiting from significant cost control benefits (Brotherton, 1997). They will be making one product in large numbers or providing one system of service, therefore saving money. If customisation was used by a business the products offered would be closely tailored to meet the individual needs of the customer. This would be a far more expensive strategy for a hospitality business to adopt because there would be a large increase in the variety of products and services on offer and therefore production runs would be smaller (Brotherton, 1997).
Standardisation is used in all areas of the hospitality industry. In restaurants, the food that is served and the surroundings are standardised in some way. This applies to both fast-food restaurants and high class fine dining restaurants. As Taylor (1999) in Wood (2000) suggests, chefs have to use a recipe to cook the food, for the ingredients, how to combine them and cooking instructions. In hotels, rooms are designed to all look the same. On an airline flight, passengers usually receive a choice of two or three standardised meals.
One of the major sectors in the hospitality industry is restaurants. A restaurant is defined by the Oxford English Dictionary Online as "An establishment where refreshments or meals may be obtained." (). Restaurants come under the tertiary economic sector which is essentially the service industry sector. It combines tangible and intangible aspects to create a full dining experience. The tangible aspect is the food served to the customer. The intangible aspect is the restaurant surroundings, ambience and the service given by the waiter or waitress. One of the main characteristics of the restaurant industry is perishability. This means that if a seat in a restaurant is not filled on one night, it cannot be stored for future use, the revenue from that seat is lost. This can incur costs for the business because over estimating the number of customers can lead to over staffing, which obviously reduces profitability for a company (Lockwood and Jones, 2000, in Lashley and Morrison, 2000). Heterogeneity is another characteristic. People can act differently from one day to the next, so a waiter may be in a good mood one day and be polite and friendly to the customers, but another day he could be rude and unhelpful. People also make mistakes, which can affect the uniformity of a product of service.
One level of the restaurant industry is fast-food restaurants, such as McDonalds. In this style of restaurant, standardisation is used in almost ever operation. The food itself is standardised, every burger or product that is produced will look identical, so a customer will know that the burger they get in New York will be identical to the one in Chicago and those eaten next week will be identical to those eaten today (Ritzer, 2002). The service that the staff provide is also standardised. Employees receive training which enables them to work efficiently by following steps in a process. They are often given scripts to memorise and use whenever necessary (Ritzer, 2002). Technology is being used more and more to replace workers. Workers can make mistakes; they may put too few fries in the box or forget to put the special sauce on a burger. This will reduce the uniformity of their products. Using technology helps 'McDonaldised systems' ensure that their products and services remain the same (Ritzer, 2002). Blair (1994) in Alfino et al. (1998) suggests that fast food restaurants have made dining out available to the masses and have contributed to the growing trend of domestic eating being a special event.
There are various ways that we might evaluate the usefulness of standardisation. To evaluate a standardised procedure, such as checking in guests at a hotel, the management would need to look at if staff were more efficient; checking guests in was speeded up, whether fewer mistakes were being made and customer feedback, as to whether they felt they were getting an improved service. To evaluate a standardised product, such as a recipe in a restaurant, management would need to look at the production time, the amount of wastage and again, customer feedback and whether there was an improvement in sales.
There are many advantages of standardisation, both for customers and for staff. Standardisation means that products and services are uniformed; therefore a customer knows what they are getting. Ritzer (2002) suggests that the "McDonaldised system" provides consumers with a wider range of products than ever before and makes these products and services available to them whenever they want them, therefore increasing convenience. For example, many Tesco stores are now open 24 hours so people can visit their local Tesco at 3am to get whatever they need. In the hospitality industry, standardisation means that customers know what to expect and can depend on reliable quality. If they go to a Hilton hotel in New York, they can expect to be of the same standard as the one they went to in London. Ritzer (2002) suggests that the success of standardised systems shows that "people have to come to prefer a world in which there are few surprises." (p17). Standardisation also gives customers lower prices. By standardising products and services, businesses can save money through economies of scale, as previously discussed. They can then pass these savings onto customers, making them more competitive as a company. Another major advantage for customers is that standardised processes in hospitality businesses allow staff to focus more on the customer. "Standardisation of production can release staff to concentrate more on service quality." (Taylor and Lyon, 1995, p65). If staff know what they are doing and have a process to follow they will have to think less about their task and will therefore have more time to concentrate on ensuring the customer receives the best possible service. This benefits not only the customer, but the business as well because if the customer receives a good service they are likely to return again and tell their friends about it.
Providing a good service to customers and receiving positive feedback will be motivating to employees because they will feel they are doing a good job, "If individuals within the organisation can see their ideas and efforts contributing to the performance of the business, they will be encouraged still further." (Paul Trott, 1998, p49). Standardisation benefits employees in other ways too. If employees have to follow set procedures to ensure deliverance of a uniform product or service then they will always know what they are doing and will feel confident in their work.
However, there are disadvantages of standardisation for staff and customers. Standardised products and services, such as fast food restaurants, are reducing diversity, which many people want (Ritzer, 1993 in Alfino et al. 1998). Brotherton (1997) suggests that standardisation can leave customers with less choice because businesses assume that the same product will satisfy the needs of all consumer groups when in reality it may not. This would be bad for a hospitality business because if a customer could not get the product or service that they required they may look to another company to provide it. Ritzer (2002) gives the example of standardisation in a fast food restaurant, saying that customers who are lining up to get their food "feel as though they are part of an assembly line." (p20). This will not make a customer feel special or valued by the company because they are just getting the same standard service as everyone else.
For employees, standardisation can be very demotivating. Ritzer (2002) suggests employees can also feel as if they are part of an assembly line because they are just preparing and selling the same food over and over again. This can be dehumanising. It also removes the need for skilled employees and limits their opportunities for decision making and having an input into the business. Lockwood and Jones (2000) in Lashley and Morrison (2000) suggest that division of labour allows tasks to be broken down into groups allowing skill specialisation which means closer supervision and more control over employees is possible, and the need for skilled staff is reduced. The fact that employees have little input into the running of the business and cannot be part of the decision making process may be demotivating. A skilled chef in a restaurant who has to follow a set process to prepare a dish and cannot use any of his own creativity may feel that his skills are being wasted. Ritzer (2002) believes the increase in people on the planet and the increasing pace of life makes it impossible for us to return to the world where restaurants were run by chefs able to use their creativity.
In conclusion, standardisation can be a useful asset to a hospitality business. It can increase efficiency which in turn increases profitability for a business. It has advantages for both customers and staff in that it provides a fast and reliable service for customers and staff will always be clear about what is expected of them in a standardised process. However, in answer to the original question, standardisation does provide customers with less choice. A standardised product provided by a company gives little thought to the individual needs and wants of consumers and assumes that one product or service will fit all, which in most circumstances it will not. Standardisation is also demotivating for employees because they are not given the flexibility to use their own ideas and creativity in the workplace and are trained to provide the same product or service every time. The solution to this problem is relatively simple, a combination of both standardisation and customisation is required, so that a business can gain the benefits of efficiency and productivity, while ensuring that individual customer needs are met. A good example of this theory in action is Pizza Hut. Customers can choose their own toppings to go on a standardised pizza base. Taylor and Lyon (1995) "predict that future success will be enjoyed by those organisations that understand the need to reassert the importance of differences among hospitality consumers rather that seek mass similarities." (p67).
