The history of US intervention in Latin America is long and intertwined with some of the most depressing episodes in twentieth and twenty-first century Latin America. Although the high-profile military schemes such as the failed 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion are most infamous, they are by no means the only or necessarily the most damaging interventions. Military, economic and political interventions from the 'colossus of the North' (Friedman, 2003: 621) - some admitted by Washington and others not - have been commonplace since the late nineteenth century and continue today in numerous countries including Colombia, Cuba, Venezuela, Paraguay and Haiti.
The Monroe Doctrine, principles espoused by President James Monroe in 1823 with the aim of protecting all America from possible European imperial aggressions but which has more commonly been used as legitimising actions which defended US interests abroad, has underpinned almost all US interventions in Latin America. Subsequent, additional documents modified the USA 's self-appointed role in Western Hemisphere politics (notably the Roosevelt Corollary of 1904, based on a very particular interpretation of the Monroe Doctrine and the idea of Manifest Destiny ), but ultimately it is the Monroe Doctrine which has repeatedly been manipulated to justify intervention - military, economic or political. 'Manifest Destiny' originally referred to the westward expansion of the United States and to the spreading of democracy and development to others. Late in the 19th century the idea was revived and used in some instances to justify US interventions overseas.
Since Cuba in 1898, military power and economic intervention have been used hand-in-hand as a way of securing US influence in Latin America. Buying rights to military intervention, enforcing US-favouring trade tariffs (often leading to economic dependency on the US and the destruction of autochthonous industry), offering loans with strict repayment conditions and other "systematic inequality" (Friedman, 2003: 621) led to a North American hegemony, masked as policies aimed at helping Latin American development. However, as K  nig (1998: 431) rightly points out, "One must only look at the effect of the American financial measures and loans in countries like Haiti and Nicaragua to realise that the policy [so-called 'dollar diplomacy'] was more a policy of control than a policy of assistance" [own translation]. Early  'successes' in Cuba (from 1898) and Panama (1903), who both earned independence thanks to US intervention but were then subject to 'legitimate', negotiated political and economic interference, justified the policy of intervention and the precedent was set for future incursions into Latin America.
President Theodore Roosevelt went further still in 1904, stating that the United States had a right to unilateral intervention anywhere on the continent if it deemed that a Latin American government was incapable of guaranteeing peace, order and the protection of life and property. The US assigned itself the role of judge and enforcer, and, in the words of K  nig (1998), intervention was seen no longer a right or a privilege, but an obligation.
This declaration, the Roosevelt Corollary, along with the positive (from a North American point of view) Cuba and Panama experiences, established a comfortable status quo in which American companies could spread their influence throughout the region almost with impunity, backed with massive wealth and superior industrial development, as well as a new-found sense of invulnerability.
In short, the overriding concern was not the protection of the continent against European powers or the spreading of democracy, but instead the protection and furthering of US interests, almost regardless of the consequences. Rhetoric changed, for example under Woodrow Wilson (1913-1921) and F.D.Roosevelt 's 'Good Neighbour' policy (1933-1945), but interventions continued unabated. Throughout the twentieth century, Washington kept various dictators in power as long as they remained largely at the service of US economic interests; Trujillo (Dominican Republic), Batista (Cuba), A.Somoza (Nicaragua), P  rez J  menez (Venezuela) and Pinochet (Chile). The policy could perhaps be best summed up by Franklin D. Roosevelt 's famous comment on Somoza: "He may be a son-of-a-bitch, but he 's our son-of-a-bitch.".
The twentieth century saw interventions continue, both formal and negotiated (e.g. Panama, 1903; Colombia, 1990s) and informal (e.g. Chile, 1970-73), and of political, economic and military nature. Indeed, Friedman astutely observes: "history, in the form of US interventions [in Latin America] seems to repeat itself so reliably." (2003: 621).
The United States continues, albeit to a lesser degree, to pursue a policy of intervention in Latin America. Current schemes include a heavy CIA presence in Ciudad del Este, Paraguay and alleged coup attempts against President Ch  vez of Venezuela; political intervention includes pressure on Bolivia to further restrict coca growers' rights; economic intervention continues in Argentina through the IMF and World Bank. The twentieth century 's heavy-handed military tactics are perhaps a thing of the past, but Latin America has certainly not forgotten. In fact, the consequences of all kinds of US intervention are still unravelling, changing the dynamics of US-Latin American relations; as Hilton (2005) explains, "a slow revolution...has changed the geopolitical map".
Although the IMF and World Bank are not official instruments of US foreign policy, it should be noted that this is often how they perceived by Latin American nations, and with some reason: The World Bank is - and has always been - run by the United States and currently has at its head Paul Wolfowitz, until recently Under-Secretary of Defence in President Bush 's administration. The USA also holds more than 17% of the total votes in the IMF, nearly three times more than Japan, the next most powerful nation (International Monetary Foundation, 2005).
Clear examples of their use as mechanisms for carrying out US policy include Allende 's Chile, where, at the same time as US funding for the Chilean military rose by some 1,875% (1970-1973), the US forced the World Bank to refuse credit to the Allende government and to cut aid from $19.3million in 1970, to zero in 1971, 1972 & 1973 (K  nig, 1998: 470-471). Also Argentina under Carlos Menem when the IMF, World Bank and United States government enforced economic policies, including open markets, which led to the sale or collapse of state assets and domestic industry and ultimately to the crisis of December 2001, the effects of which are still unfolding.
Memories of dictatorships supported, at least tacitly, by successive US governments and failed economic measures enforced by Washington have caused Latin American populations and leaders to question the virtues of following the northern giant and of opening markets; mistrust and disillusionment dominate. America 's leaders are leaning left and returning to protectionist trade policies in an attempt to reduce unemployment (LaFranchi, 2005). Several of the largest Latin American economies are already led by socialist leaders who to some degree resist US pressure on opening markets in favour of domestic recovery plans and social reforms (Kirchner in Argentina, Lagos in Chile, Lula da Silva in Brazil) and even nations traditionally allied to Washington show signs of favouring left-wing candidates in forthcoming elections (e.g. Mexico, where leftist former-mayor of Mexico City Andr  s L  pez Obrador is favourite to follow American ally Vicente Fox [BBC, 2005]). After years of governments (democratically elected or forcefully imposed with or without US assistance) pandering to the economic interests of the United States, leaders are now attending to domestic interests in a manner not entirely dissimilar to that in which Jacobo Arbenz G  zman began to comprehensively reform Guatemala (before being deposed in 1954 after CIA intervention) or Juan Bosch 's liberal reforms in the Dominican Republic (before the 1962 US invasion), or indeed Salvador Allende 's attempts at social and economic reform in Chile (before the 1973, US-supported and financed coup de etat).
In short, it would seem that Latin America is finally ready and willing to stand up to the United States' long-standing hegemony, recognising that the US can no longer simply repeat the tried and tested formula used in Guatemala and the other instances given above; the comfortable status quo which the US worked for decades to maintain has finally broken down.
Despite this new-found confidence, the economic power of the US remains undisputable. George W.Bush has pushed for the creation of a Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA), the latest in a string of attempts to construct a hemispheric economic network, but for the first time domestic affairs are overriding any US-sponsored panamerican vision. In November 2005 at the Summit of the Americas in Mar del Plata, Argentina, the FTAA proposal was roundly rejected in favour of closer regional ties, including the future membership of Venezuela in MERCOSUR. So what changed? What allows Latin America to now be more robust in the defence of its interests?.
A common market trade zone whose full members are currently Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay. Chile and Bolivia have political affiliation and trade agreements with MERCOSUR.
Firstly, the United States has been heavily engaged in other regions, removing Latin America from such a prominent position in US foreign affairs. Secondly, events throughout the twentieth century betrayed the egoistic, imperialistic nature of US policy, hence Latin America has become ever more sceptical of North American leadership. Arguably, the reality has been shown to be that the US has, for all its protestations, treated Iberoamerica as an informal empire, leaching wealth, imposing its will 'by hook or by crook' and then, when the situation starts to unravel, it is the local populace who suffer the consequences. Finally, after 125 years of almost continual interventions, it might be argued that the US has few new, acceptable resources left at its disposal - the early political justifications for intervention no longer stand up under modern scrutiny (e.g. the Monroe Doctrine is obsolete), the threat - real or imagined - of Communism disappeared in 1989, and the economic bubble of 1990s America has most certainly burst. Without these factors, there is little to legitimise intervention of any kind and scant reason for Latin America to doggedly follow US instructions or suggestions - Europe and East Asia now offer similar opportunities without such risk of intervention.
It remains to be seen how the US will react to growing Iberoamerican hostility. In the short term it appears there are difficult times ahead, with the likes of Ch  vez being deliberately confrontational and the Bush administration favouring a T.Roosevelt-esque attitude: 'It is not enough that governments be democratically elected; they must also govern in a democratic manner - a reference to Ch  vez 's populist style' (Hilton, 2005 reporting comments by C.Rice). In the longer term, future presidents will inherit the problems caused by leaders right back to McKinley (1897-1901) and even beyond. With such a long history of intervention whenever there has been the possibility of a Latin American leader upsetting the balance of power by carrying out social or economic reforms, resentment towards the US will not easily be overcome. The legacy of 20 th century treatment of Latin America seems set to influence decisions and attitudes for decades to come, and may only be overcome if the US heeds the words of one of the apparently more conciliatory presidents, Wilson, who in his 1915 address to Congress recognised the need for "no claim of guardianship or thought of wards but, instead, a full and honourable association as of partners between ourselves and our neighbours, in the interest of all America, north and south." (cited by Peters, 2005). More than just self-defence of Latin American interests, achieving that relationship will require a dramatic change in the way the United States perceives itself, plus the abandonment of Manifest Destiny theory, the Monroe Doctrine and Roosevelt Corollary principles and the practices of the 20 th century. Social and economic reforms are clearly what many Latin American nations desperately need and the US must learn to accept the results of the democratic processes it claims to hold so dear, even if in the short term that means less favourable conditions for US interests.
Not fully condoned by any president since Hoover (1930), when he rejected the ideas advocated in the Roosevelt Corollary.
At the 35th meeting of the General Assembly of the Organisation of American States in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, 7th June 2005.
