This report provides an analysis of the broader business environment of the UK and France from a human resource perspective. The findings are taken as a basis to development an appropriate approach to people management of a British hospitality organisation entering the French market. Research has shown that similarities prevail, however, that there are also dissimilarities which should not be underestimated. In order to adjust best and perform well a polycentric orientation is chosen. Furthermore, resource, reward, training and development schemes are included suggesting a possible design for a luxury hotel. Another point discussed refers to equality approaches and their advantages and disadvantages for both employer and employee. It is concluded that similarities between the UK and France dominate but it should be beard in mind that there are also dissimilarities to which should be paid major attention in order to select the best human resource approach for the French market.
The Ch  teaux Hotel Group was founded in 1990 in the UK (see Appendix 1). With three hotels The Ch  teaux Hotel Group forms a group of hotels that have been renovated and refitted in accordance with their prestigious past and their many individual features. Each unit has its own style and character. Prime locations are in the countryside. These five star hotels house between 25 and 40 guest rooms, four to eight suites, food and beverage facilities and provide various leisure amenities and cultural programmes. The Ch  teaux Hotel Group operates three hotels in the UK.
Due to France 's location in Europe and its constantly high number of tourist arrivals (WTO 2004) The Ch  teaux Hotel Group is thinking about to open further properties in France. The country is situated in Western Europe and borders on Belgium, Luxembourg, Germany, Switzerland, Italy, Monaco, Andorra and Spain. France offers a great diversity of landscapes including rivers, lakes, coastlines and sea sides, mountain ranges, rural areas and cities. France is a democratic country and has got an economy which is shaped by private enterprises and substantial intervention by the government in key sectors such as transportation and communication that, however, is declining (Whyte 2004).
The French hotel industry comprises nearly 30,000 establishments and can list 1.5 billion overnight stays in 2003. It is the most visited country (Minist  re D  l  gu   du Tourisme 2005a). Wine tourism is just one area of tourism opportunities in France. The economic potential of this market sector has not been realised for a long time. It has changed, however, since the last years. Wine-related attractions such as wine museums, wine routes or wine tasting have increased. It can be expected that this market sector is growing in future times (Frochot 2000).
The literature provides different approaches that help to identify the macro environment of an organisation. One of them is the PEST-framework which focuses on political, economic, social-cultural and technological influences. Political factors that may affect managing people include all actions a state is involved like legislation, regulation or transfer of power. Whereas economy comprises all fields that concern business including labour market socio-cultural influences look at values, attitudes, demography or education. The technological environment refers to changes and developments in this field that may have impacts on the industry and an organisation and its people management in particular (Campbell et al. 2002). Those external factors are crucial for a company entering a new market. However, they become even more important when entering a market abroad as the type of international strategy is affected by them including the human resource strategy (Boella and Goss-Turner 2005).
Therefore, this paradigm is used to analyse and compare those factors regarding the broad business environment of the UK and France in order to facilitate decision-making in terms of implementation of strategies and personnel planning for a company planning to enter a foreign market.
Both the UK and France are countries whose political systems are based on democratic principles (Whyte 2005, Whyte 2004). This means for a British company that it will operate in a country with a stable democratic system similar to the one at home. Furthermore, both countries are members of the European Union (EU) and thus, some of the political decisions are made within a shared framework and affect both countries to the same extent. For example the Treaty of Maastricht on European Union includes, among others, the principle of Freedom of Establishment (Europa 2004) which facilitates the process of entering the French market for British entrepreneurs. However, the Social Charter of 1989, signed by EU member states, has had a major impact on employment issues on all political levels. It introduced several regulations including Freedom of Movement within the Union for EU citizens (Holden and Claydon 2004). This means that employees can cross borders and take employment in other EU countries as well what again can be negatively and positively for the respective country depending on various factors like unemployment rate, shortage of labour force or level of remuneration.
Focusing on labour legislation it can be identified that the UK practices a very liberal approach in comparison to France that emphasises the protection of workers based on rights and agreements (Federation of European Employers 2004a). Therefore, setting up a business in France might be hampered by it.
The UK has one of the strongest economies in Europe. The service sector contributes the major part to the GDP and counts about two thirds of the total GDP (Whyte 2005). The overall GDP growth is above the EU and OECD average between 1994 and 2004 (see Appendix 2). The economic growth of France is below the total OECD level and only slightly above the EU average (see Appendix 2). The average income per capita, however, is comparable with the one of the UK (see Appendix 2).
The economic performance is also reflected in the rate of unemployment in both countries. The UK level of unemployment is below the EU and OECD average whereas France is above both averages (see Appendix 2). So, France, different from the UK, has to struggle with unemployment, high labour costs, an inflexible labour market and high taxes. About 15% of the total employment in France works in the travel and tourism sector compared to about 10% in the UK (see Appendix 2).
International migration to the UK has been increased since the last years. This trend has been especially reinforced by joining the EU of ten further countries in 2004 (see Appendix 3). The situation is similar in France where the numbers of inward migration has risen (see Appendix 3). Migration workers do mostly low skilled jobs and are employed very often in the hospitality sector (ILO 2001).
The national minimum wage rate for the UK amounts    1,273 per month on the basis of a 40 hour week whereas the national minimum wage rate for France is    1,217.88 per month on the basis of 35 hours a week (Federation of European Employers 2005). However, reality shows that half of the employees in the hospitality sector have to work irregular hours (ILO 2001). This again may cause inappropriate behaviour towards customers because of stress, accidents at work or illness in the short and long run. So in the end, long hours can be more ineffective than effective for an organisation.
Trade unions in France experienced a dramatic decline in their numbers what the proportion of 9% of unionised labour force shows (Federation of European Employers 2004b). The reason for the decline can be seen in a growing unemployment rate which caused that employers could choose from a greater variety of workers and so, preferred to employ non-unionised labour force (Gordon1993). The percentage of workers organised in the British trade union is higher than in France and counts about 30%. However, it is presumed that the figures will decline further in the upcoming years throughout Europe what could enforce that employer and employees are called to look for solutions on a business level (Federation of European Employers 2004b).
Since the last 30 years the population is ageing in the UK. This development will continue over the next decades (see Appendix 4). It means for the tourism industry a growing market as the income of retirees went up over the last years continuously and life expectancy have also risen due to better health conditions (see Appendix 4). Implications can be the creation of new jobs in this sector but also changes in customer-employee relations what again may lead to shifts in required skills.
Focusing on the age structure of France it is like in the UK. The number of retirees goes up significantly and at the same time the working population falls due to an upturn in the birth rate (Whyte 2004) (see Appendix 4). Thus, the consequences are similar to those of the UK. Although the disposable income of retirees is slowing down in France they still form a strong-financial group (Moreau 2002). Another fact that needs to be mentioned is the shortage of labour force that will probably arise due to the rising gap between working population and pensioners. This again may cause tremendous problems for organisations looking for staff.
Both the UK and France have a highly-developed educational system. The number of those who attend higher education has increased dramatically since the last decades (Whyte 2004, Whyte 2005). However, the education system in France has often been criticised.
In other words, the major emphasis is put on general education rather than vocational training. Furthermore, there is a lacking effort to provide courses that correspond with the needs of the market. Even though there have taken place improvements the French education system still prioritises formal academic teaching. This is also reflected in France 's third rank in an international study looking at the number of people aged 20 to 24 who attend an educational institution (see Appendix 6). This means for the tourism industry a shortage of appropriate labour force as the example of the Rh  ne-Alpes region proves where jobseekers could not fulfil the requirements of vacancies due to missing formal training (ILO 2001).
Vocational training is also poor in the UK. Providing more apprenticeships is meant to improve the situation (Whyte 2005). According to the Hospitality Training Foundation (2005) 30% of vacancies in hotels and restaurants in the UK could not be filled due to skills shortages. This shows that the situation is similar in both countries and the industry is faced with a lack of skilled workers (see Appendix 5).
The technological advance during the last decades has led to tremendous societal changes ranging from consumer behaviour to employment issues. Faster means of transportation, sophisticated communication and information systems are the result of the progress. It has caused shifts in nearly every field. Tourism workforce, now, has to deal with new booking procedures. CRSs and Internet require other skills from workers. The rapid change of technology intensifies the situation additionally (ILO 2001). Looking at the UK and France the approach to this development is broadly spoken similar. Even though, France lags behind in the Internet use compared to other European countries the penetration rate was still 37% in 2003. The UK counts with 56% of Internet usage to one of the countries with the highest rates (Whyte 2004). The figures are assumed to be higher in 2005. So, employees who are familiar with technological means to some extent facilitate the adoption of new technology applications in an organisation (see Appendix 6).
The beginnings of wider personnel management (PM) reach back to the 1950s and changed over the next decades corresponding with shifts in policy, economy and society. In the 1980s, trade unions lost in importance due to low unemployment and the introducing of new labour legislation. This led to the idea to achieve best company performance by a committed labour force (McKenna and Beech 2002, Price 2000). Torrington and Chapman (cited in Torrington et al 2002 p. 13) define the term as follow:
It includes recruitment, training and development, payment matters, rewarding and emphasis on employees' needs in terms of work. PM is seen as rather reactive as proactive and strongly bureaucratic shaped (ibid).
The emergence of human resource management (HRM) in the early 1990s is often seen as the advancement of PM. However, there exist many various opinions in what HRM is different from PM. Torrington et al. (2002) advocate that PM and HRM are the same and stick to their definition of PM. Others like Storey (cited in Price 2000 p. 5) define the term as.
Following this definition of HRM it is assumed to be more strategic and supportive in order to achieve company objectives. This is believed to realise through training and development, appraisal, rewarding and resourcing. HRM is marked as being reactive and trying to meet future challenges a business could be faced with. Highly qualified and motivated employees are core factors and are meant to be more efficient for the organisation. Work-related needs of staff members are important and are aimed at fulfilling them. It is seen as prerequisite to benefit the most. So, HRM can be described as 'mediator' between labour force and company which has to manage the 'relationship' between both to be successful in terms of performance on all levels (Price 2000, McKenna and Beech 2002).
The Harvard model refers to the soft approach of HRM. It views the workforce as 'humans' and embarks on a strategy that corporative objectives can be achieved more easily when employees and company cooperate. This is sought to realise by motivation, including staff into decision-making processes and an organisational structure employees can identify with. Workforce is seen as asset (Boella and Goss-Turner 2005, Price 2000).
The Michigan model in contrast describes the hard approach of HRM. Labour force is seen as resource and advocates that the human capital should be treated like all other resources. Employees are 'used' to complete the organisation 's goals and maximise its efficiency (Boella and Goss-Turner 2005, Price 2000).
As mentioned earlier domestic HRM approaches to PM in a proactive sense with the purpose of being productive and includes at least recruiting, training, development and rewarding. This explanation needs to be taken further in order to meet the idea of international HRM. Taylor et al (1996 p. 960) define international HRM as.
Dowling et al. (1999 p. 4) see the main difference between domestic HRM and international HRM in.
They also suggest that international HRM comprises more functions that arise due to its nature. They are more far-reaching and require a broader view. Following Dowling et al. (ibid p. 5) international HRM has also to focus on.
Thus, it is of importance to understand the differences between both models. Only so, an appropriate HRM approach is possible when operating on the international level.
Defining this term it can be followed Hodgetts and Luthans (2000 p. 108) who state.
However, culture is not limited to one specific area but occurs on every level (Pizam et al. 1997). Additionally, there are difference between regions and countries. So, companies expanding their business to the international level need to be aware of dissimilarities compared to their home country.
Hofestede focuses in his work on cultural behaviour and how it influences the organisational structure of a company. He differentiates between four cultural dimensions. Power distance is defined as.
This means that countries with a low level of power distance tend to have flat organisational structures. There seems to be rather cooperation and teamwork between supervisor and employee than hierarchy.
Uncertainty avoidance explains.
Countries with high uncertainty avoidance are trying to keep risk as low as possible. Applying it to an organisation it may be reflected in a more organised, structured and planned approach to work. Societies with low uncertainty avoidance, however, are likely to put more responsibility on subordinates.
Countries with a high individualism are characterised by a high degree of personal responsibility. Collective societies, in contrast, put major emphasis on team work. The needs of the group as whole are more important than the individual 's interest.
Masculinity describes the degree to which a society tends to favour masculine values like materialism, less caring and career orientated. Feminine countries rather stress the opposite (McKenna and Beech 2002, Pizam et al. 1997, Hodgetts and Luthans 2000, Schneider and Barsoux 1997).
However, it has to be considered that all four dimensions interrelate to each other and cannot be regarded separately when plotting a country.
Applying Hofstede 's model to the UK and France some differences can be identified between both countries (see Appendix 7). Whereas power distance is low in the UK it is high in France. This is reflected in a highly centralised state in France as well as in organisations presenting a very hierarchal structure. Decision-making and responsibilities are only made within a limited scope. In contrast to France British companies are decentralised and less formal. Managers are called to achieve collaboration among all employees (Schneider and Barsoux 1997, Jackson 2002).
Individualism is rated high in both states, however higher in the UK. Initiatives and commitment of the individual are important as well as personal independence of the employee towards the company.
In terms of uncertainty avoidance France is very different to the UK. French people tend to avoid uncertainty. British are the opposite and may support that managers are more likely to be risky and labour force may show higher job mobility than French do. (Deresky 2000).
Masculinity is higher in the UK than France what means that the social consciousness in a UK enterprise is of minor importance than profit making. Career and formal education count a lot especially among men what the French education system proves.
Trompenaars developed another model to analyse cultural differences. He distinguishes between the following dimensions:
Universalism vs. particularism which describes the extent to which a society tends to stress relationships compared to sticking to formal agreements. Countries emphasising particularism rely on trust and often unwritten contracts. Individualism vs. communitarianism can be compared with Hofstede 's idea mentioned earlier. Neutral vs. emotional refers to the degree of showing emotions in the public or during work. It is about interpersonal acting. Diffuse vs. specific cultures differentiate themselves in the extent of separating public from private life. In diffuse countries both areas are allocated equal parts whereas specific societies have a high share in public life. Achievement vs. ascription relates to the fact whether or not emphasis is put on status gained in performance or experience and age (Hodgetts and Luthans 2000, Boella and Goss-Tuner 2005, Deresky 2000).
In order to compare the UK and France regarding their culture Trompenaars' theory is applied. There are similarities but also divergences between both countries. The UK and France are specific cultures and show a high score in the field of achievement. Whereas France is rather emotional the UK is a very neutral society. So, British entrepreneurs need to bear in mind that their French counterparts are more extroverted and tend to be more enthusiastic. Universalism is rated high in the UK, however, only medium in France. The same applies to individualism. According to these findings British managers need to be aware of the differences between their country and the host country in order to select an appropriate HRM approach (Hodgetts and Luthans 2000, Deresky 2000).
Perlmutter 's (1969) concept of centricity illustrates four different approaches for firms expanding their activities to foreign markets. It has been applied mainly to international HRM. The ethno-centric approach is home-country orientated what means that managers are recruited from the own state. This may be cost-saving for employers as they select staff from the parent company and at the same time they do not have to train them because these people are already familiar with the organisation. Additionally, the degree of control is greater because the business culture of the home country is mostly practiced and major decisions are made at headquarters. Career opportunities for local employees, on the other hand, are rare. Higher positions are often held by home country nationals.
Polycentricism, however, sets priority to local staff as they are familiar with patterns of doing business and values of the host country. The regio-centric approach sees its key labour market at greater regional areas including across borderlines. Employers applying one of these strategies can benefit in terms of saving transfer and training costs. Locals do not need to be educated in language and know about cultural conventions and business practices. This, however, could also turn into a disadvantage. Cooperation between home and host country may be difficult due to a lack of knowledge about the host culture.
The geocentric approach employs people from throughout the world and is globally orientated. Therefore, employers can take advantage of a relatively wide range of people or internal staff and can recruit the ones who suit the organisation or position the best. Internal selection of managers may also contribute to develop strong relations to the company what again can be beneficial for both. Whereas it might secure employees the workplace because of their rich knowledge about the company the organisation itself can take advantage of it as well. Otherwise costs for expatriates have to be considered, too, which can be very high owing to continuous training or allowances for removal expatriates. In addition to that, immigration regulations of some countries could hamper the global recruitment (Cullen 1999).
These four strategic orientations provide an organisation different opportunities how it can run its people management on the international level. Others like Schuler et al. (cited in Almond et al. 2004) or Taylor et al. (1996) have taken Perlmutter 's paradigm and developed it further with regard to HRM. Whereas the former focuses on the overall external and internal influences of international HRM the latter emphasises factors that affect the choice of a particular strategic orientation abroad.
The Victorian Ch  teaux Hotels should apply a polycentric approach when entering the French market. Key positions and staff are recruited from the host country. Business practices follow local procedures which French managers know better than their British counterparts. Moreover, the parent company can reduce costs for training, relocation and transfer. Speaking French is one of the preconditions to operate in France. That is cost-increasing and might also be time consuming. Additionally, this probably takes place out of office hours what could raise expenses again as potential expatriates ask for compensation. This seems to be even more important as The Victorian Ch  teaux Hotel Group operates only three premises in the UK so far and does not have such a strong financial background and international experiences. Employing people from the same cultural background might also facilitate the cooperation among management and staff members. However, it has to be considered, too, that the collaboration between home and host country works effectively. Lacking knowledge of the British management about the French culture could hinder a proper cooperation.
Furthermore, French business culture is hierarchal. British people are used to a flat organisational structure. So, this can cause difficulties when filling key positions with home country personnel and others with local people. The polycentric approach avoids this.
In order to find the best approach to HRM a company needs to define the type of product it offers first. Lashley 's grid (1998) proposes a theoretical tool to determine the degree of standardisation and customisation as well as the amount of empowerment of employees that is applied in an organisation. By plotting the firm it can be identified which management style suits the company including services offered best.
There are different options to categorise labour markets. One can be seen in the division into primary and secondary labour market. The former includes highly skilled people with a high income and good opportunities for training and development. The internal labour market is strong. The latter refers to low or unskilled workers with poor earnings and working conditions as well as no training and development opportunities. The internal labour market is weak. A move from the secondary to the primary labour market is limited (Claydon 2004).
Akinson 's model of the flexible firm (cited in Claydon 2004, Price 2000) attempts to respond to the rising flexibility that has taken place on the labour market since 1980s. It distinguishes between two types of workforce. The first group are core employees who benefit from regular contracts, training and other activities and an internal labour market. In return they are expected to be flexible and multi-skilled to move between different functions within the organisation. The second group is formed by peripheral workforce who is characterised by temporary employment or part-time workers receiving only few benefits of the company. They are taken on if required. However, according to Claydon (2004) and Price (2000) the implementation of the flexible firm model in practice is limited. They argue that companies either may not be able to adopt this concept or not willing and that there seems to be a trend rather to numerical than functional flexibility.
Applying Lashley 's grid the management style of the The Victorian Ch  teaux Hotel should be mainly professional, however, with a tendency to the participative style (see Appendix 7) for both the managerial and operative level. This approach assumes to fit the service offer the best. The Victorian Ch  teaux Hotels are individual hotel premises of high quality. Customers expect individual service to some extent. Therefore, it is necessary that the operative personnel is empowered to satisfy those needs. The same applies to the management. Decisions need to be made on unit level as its amenities vary what requires differently skilled workers. Staff and managers should be mainly recruited from the primary labour market. Due to the customised product it is necessary to employ a high qualified managers and skilled employees. As there may arise some difficulties to find appropriate labour force in France because of a shortage of hospitality trained people the recruitment may be expanded to the home labour market. Housekeeping staff, for instance, could be selected from the secondary labour market since there is no high skilled personnel necessary and extra workers can be taken on according to the occupancy of the hotel. So, generally spoken it should be focused on the primary labour market including the internal labour market for management and customer related positions whereas various operational tasks can be filled by workers from the secondary labour market. The internal labour market but may be separated into management and operative stage owing to the hierarchal structure in France where it is nearly impossible to move on to a higher level (Trouv   1994).
The theories of Maslow and Herzberg are the most attended ones and try to identify drivers of motivating people. These concepts focus on different needs and factors in a given order that lead to motivation and so, satisfaction (see Appendix 8). However, both models have been often criticised to be too simplistic. Maslow 's framework is said to be applicable only to Western cultures (Hodgetts and Luthans 2000, McKenna and Beech 2002). Furthermore, the ranking order does not seem to be adoptable to each country as there may be culture specific differences (Hofstede in Hodgetts and Luthans, 2000). Concerning Herzberg 's concept it has been argued about the inclusion of payment within the hygiene element instead of seeing it as motivator. To sum up opinions about the value of these two theories differ among academics. Nevertheless, both approaches can be used as a starting point to look at factors that motivate people generally (see Appendix 8).
Rewarding is part of people motivation. Its purpose is to achieve set company objectives and performing on a high level. There are different types whose application depends on several factors like culture, size of company or strategic orientation. It is made a differentiation between extrinsic and intrinsic rewards. The former refers to financial benefits such as earning, extra pay or commission. Intrinsic motivation includes job recognition, training or job satisfaction. They are non-financial (Deresky 2000, McKenna and Beech 2002).
The reward system should be selected by the host country unit because of the polycentric approach to people management. Local managers know about French peculiarities better than the British parent company. Rewards for the management level may be extrinsic as according to Trouv   (1994) the identification with the organisation is rather low and work is more regarded as obligation. Therefore, it could include extra payment for annual revenue higher than expected to motivate the management team and to improve the relation between manager and company. Thus, it could be particularly beneficial in the long run and may make a contribution to the overall performance of the hotel. Motivated managers are also assumed to have a positive impact on the personnel on the operative level.
Looking at the operational level financial rewards should dominate, too. Here, it might be offered holiday pay, extra payment for long hours or a bonus for weekend or night shifts. So, it is pretended to motivate personnel in order to guarantee a high quality customer service product which is of importance especially for a hospitality organisation. Most of the staff members have direct customer contact and the hotel management needs to count on workers that are committed and motivated. This again also contributes to achieve long term objectives of the firm and at the end secures jobs.
Development is closely linked to training and often used as synonym for it in practice. However, management development aims more at enhancing managers' skills and capabilities in order to meet the goals of the company.
Although due to the globalisation some societies converge to some extent cultural differences still remain (Doyle 2004). For that reason, it is important that managers develop abilities such as being aware of foreign values, behaviours, work patterns and business practices etc. (Phillips cited in Doyle 2004). The approach applied to prepare managers for international assignments depends on several aspects including cultural distance, kind and size of company and so, its financial background or host country.
Training refers to.
With the special focus on international management it may include cultural, language and practical aspects. The actual required training, however, depends on the organisation 's strategic approach in the host country. Whereas an ethnocentric orientation may emphasis language polycentrism could stress training of the parent company 's home culture in order to understand decisions better. So as to find an appropriate scheme the company has to define which skills are required in terms of availability of functions and what skills could improve the productivity of the overall performance of the organisation. But when expanding abroad it should be considered, too, that there could be national differences in the provision of training schemes and thus, suitable labour force what again might influence the strategic approach of a firm (Hodgetts and Luthans 2000, Boella and Goss-Turner 2005).
The Victorian Ch  teaux Hotel is going to employ host country managers. Nevertheless, management development should prioritise cross-cultural activities in order to enhance the understanding of the home country culture. This might facilitate the interactions between both and hence, improve the performance of the hotel. Furthermore, a cultural exchange could also enrich the business in general. Different ideas or approaches may be identified as beneficial and helpful.
Polycentrism is the chosen strategic orientation for The Victorian Ch  teaux Hotel. Therefore, the training scheme should be designed on the unit level as the local managers know best what skills and knowledge their employees need. Training may focus on interpersonal skills, communication or operational tasks. Because of the nature of the business and the lacking personnel skilled in hospitality on-the-job training may another part of the scheme. It should put major emphasis on it as it is fundamental to run the hotel successfully. Training also contributes to qualified staff that is more committed to the firm and so, enjoy working for it on a long term basis what at the end is beneficial for both parties.
Approaches that refer to the reduction of inequality and discrimination are the equal opportunities (EO) and the management of diversity (MD) approaches. The first one is meant to balance inequality by legislation and so, includes all members or groups of society. However, it focuses more on equal basic conditions than on equal outcomes. The second approach relates to the individual and how his/her situation can be improved in terms of equality (Torrington et al. 2002, Price 2000).
A brief comparison between both ideas shows that there are some facts are overlapping, others not. The EO approach is to reduce inequality. Both employer and employee may benefit of it. In the case of the former it could be cost-saving because of a lower turnover rate and thus, at the same time increase productivity. The latter may enhance his/her career within the organisation due to working for the company for a longer time. However diversity might also reduce costs for employers in terms of training as MD could be already regarded as preparation for a foreign assignment. Otherwise, diversity can also hinder a smooth business. Different groups in terms of age, religion, ethnicity or social class might have unlike attitudes to work, abilities and skills, values what could become difficult to manage (Torrington et al. 2002).
Which approach a company should select depends on various factors such as availability of workforce, country or legislation.
The Victorian Ch  teaux Hotel should favour the MD approach. The French labour market is shaped by an increasing number of migration workers from different cultural backgrounds who are part of the personnel. Therefore, it is important that this diversity is managed well. This can reduce staff turnover what is of significance regarding the recommended service style. A relatively high level of empowerment of employees and the nature of the hotel product require a good training what causes costs. A high rate of labour turnover, however, means even higher costs for training as new staff needs to be trained in order to deliver the service which is expected by customers. Thus, the MD concept may contribute to a more efficient operation in all fields of the hotel.
This report has shown similarities and dissimilarities of the business environment of the UK and France. These outcomes are taken as a basis in order to find the most appropriate approach to people management of a British hospitality organisation planning to enter the French market.
The recommended polycentric orientation of the unit should meet the French macro environment the best. Differences in business operation, organisational structure and socio-cultural matters are overcome by this approach. Nevertheless, it does not prevent any problems between home and host country and among the local staff. Therefore, respective schemes have to be implemented on all levels. Here, emphasis should be put on a good relation between both countries with the help of cross-cultural activities. Reward, training and development systems might be provided for managers and operational staff in order to motivate and train them and so, again make a major contribution towards a high performance of the hotel company. The MD approach seems to be most suitable and effective due to the increase of international migration workers. Especially the hospitality industry has to hire personnel from the second labour market what supports this choice. Only, if the workforce is managed well the organisation is doing the same.
Even though, both countries are broadly spoken similar in terms of policy, economy and culture it has to be aware of differences, too, which should not be underestimated. Otherwise, the company may not be able to adopt a relevant people management strategy.
