Nocturnal primates of the family Galagidae have recently been under great taxonomic revision due to new discoveries concerning their behavior and morphology. Effective conservation work is dependent on an updated taxonomy in order to acknowledge the width of the biodiversity one is trying to save (Grubb et al., 2003; Groves, 2001). The proposed investigation concerns a taxonomic study of one up to five as yet scientifically unnamed primates of the genus Galagoides and Sciurocheirus, with focus on the suggested species Galagoides cf. cocos (Grubb et al. 2003).
The research will be carried out in several steps and with different methodologies appropriate for descriptions of species (International Code of Zoological Nomenclature (ICZN, 1999):
An exhaustive literature study where previous descriptions of the target taxa will be researched. The information gathered will provide important background information vital for both the choice of scientific name and for the species description.
Localize museum specimens for each species to conduct morphological research. New specimens of primates rarely occur in museums due to export regulations for endangered species (Baillie et al. , 2004), however, the presence of these potentially new species often exist in museum collections under erroneous names (Bearder, pers. comm.).
Comparative analysis of recent field data including vocal recordings, behavioral data, biogeography, morphology and genetics (i.e. karyotyping). Much focus of the study will be directed towards the important, but neglected, area of karyotype analysis though it is a vital diagnostic tool in species recognition.
The study 's main objective will be to compile sufficient amounts of character data, i.e. behavioral, morphological and genetic data, to enable the endorsement of species status independent of species concept (see Groves, 2001, for overview) applied with the specific aim as to publicly name these species in accordance with the regulations of ICZN (1999). The data collected will also create the body of a comprehensive database over the known information of the family Galagidae. :
Yes, Department of Anthropology, Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, U.K. The University origin can be traced back to 1865 when the Oxford School of Art was founded. Many different academic transformations later, the current name and curriculum was founded in 1992. Presently there are 8 academic schools active with 16 undergraduate and 15 postgraduate subject areas ranging from law, medicine and language to arts, biological and social sciences. Under the Academic School of Social Sciences and Law, operates the Department of Anthropology. The department, rated "excellent" for teaching by the Quality Assurance Agency, includes an academic staff of nine and offer one undergraduate course in Anthropology and three postgraduate courses in Anthropology, Primate Conservation and Global Japan: Culture, Business and International Relations respectively.
The speed at which new species are discovered has outraced the systematic species description and several species of the nocturnal primate family Galagidae are yet unnamed (Grubb et al., 2003). This study aims to fill in these gaps in Galagidae taxonomy and name these species according the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature (ICZN, 1999) regulations. The basis for the general description of their ecology, behaviour, geographical distribution and morphology will come from previously published and unpublished material. Since some of the new species exist as museum specimens classified under erroneous name (Bearder, pers. comm.), a positive identification of these mislabelled individuals will enable complementary morphometric measurements and description as well as the setting of a holotype specimen. Further investigations will look for interspecific differences in pelage (often their face masks), penile morphology, hand pad size and placement, vocalisation and chromosomal set-up (i.e. karyotype).
Further, the study aims to create a database for the family Galagidae. The database will contain information on the most recent nomenclature, morphological characters (external and internal), distribution, behaviour, ecology and karyotypes available for the taxa. The database will be publicly accessible through the Internet and its intent purpose is to serve as a comprehensive information source for any future comparative studies of Galagidae taxonomy.
The issue of this project is the lack of scientific names for populations of primates identified as new species. One taxa has a suggested name based on its current lower taxonomic categorisation, Galagoides cf. cocos, but the other potential taxon to be targeted for this projects are known under the names G. sp. nov. 1, G. sp nov. 2, G. sp. nov. 3 and Sciurocheirus sp. nov. . The most eminent threat that any of these suggested new species is under, resides to G. sp. nov. 2. It has been recognized as one of the "World 's 25 Most Endangered Primates" by IUCN Primate Specialist Group. G. sp. nov. 2 eminent threat to its existence should be beyond doubt with its listing on the "Top 25"-list, but no official recognition (IUCN Red List recognition of threatened species) of its, or the other unnamed Galagidae taxon, conservation status exists. Reason - no name no face.
The protection endorsed to these primates comes from recommendations from IUCN by recognizing their habitat in western and central Africa as one of the world richest in biodiversity. Special attention is given to G. cf. cocos and G. sp. nov. 2 habitats which borders inside of the "Eastern Arc Mountains and Coastal Forests of Tanzania and Kenya Biodiversity Hotspot" - assessed as one of the world 's 25 biodiversity hotspots.
The Eastern Arc Mountain-region hosts the most recent discovery of a new monkey, the highland mangabey Lophocebus kipunji (Jones et al. 2005). With further recognition of, at least two, new species of galagos within the same area, the focus on that particular 'biodiversity hotspot' will be considerable. These species will be a living evidence, flagship species, raising public awareness for a region of the world that need all the attention it can get. More attention is likely to revenue in more income for the 'host countries' which will act in favour for the conservation concept and encourage the creation of more 'biodiversity hotspots'.
The past few decades has drastically changed the earlier perception of nocturnal primates as quite simple, solitary, forest dwelling creatures of the dark to very complex creatures with very elaborate behavioural and social attributes. Nocturnal primates rely more on vocal and olfactory cues than vision for social communication. In other words, nocturnal primates differ from their diurnal relatives in that voice cues are used for conspecific recognition rather than visual cues. Evolution has favoured variation in voice rather than face, so to speak, which makes the nocturnal world harder for us diurnal primates to understand. This might seem quite intuitively self evident but the resistance amongst diurnal primate researchers has been surprisingly resilient. Once specific vocalisation was established as a fact, the use of calls as species identifier has revealed a diversity of almost unprecedented magnitude. So many species are discovered that the knowledge of their existence can prevail for years without being given a scientific name. A situation that hardly exists amongst primates that is diurnal, as us. This study aims to set the naming of nocturnal primates in the first room in an attempt to let taxonomy catch up with current species knowledge.
A recent upsurge in studies of nocturnal primates has discovered a wider diversity within the taxon than previously thought (Bearder et al., 1995; Nash et al., 1989). Researchers that have set out to study a specific species has ended up with data on never previously described species (Honess, 1996). This phenomenon is especially true for studies conducted on the Galagidae taxon. From five species described before 1979 (Schwarz, 1931), to 11 in the 80 's (Olson 1979; Nash et al. 1989), to the current number around 25 described species (Bearder et al. 2003; Grubb et al., 2003).
The number of new taxon discovered has gained such rapid momentum that several taxon still remains unnamed (Grubb et al., 2003). We know that they exist but will face serious problems if their habitat becomes threatened by means of human exploitation (logging, human settlement, farming etc.). A species not officially described is, in theory, a species not existing, and any attempt save an area from exploitation on the grounds of high biodiversity (measured in number of species) is seriously hampered. This is a major problem that has been highlighted by the leading researchers in the field (Bearder 1999; Honess 1996; Grubb et al. , 2003). We are facing an eminent risk of loosing newly discovered species just because we did not get the chance to name them.
No, this project is not associated with any program under the helm of IUCN/SSC. Since action plans are "Species-Based Actions", the Primate Specialist Group has identified the problem for unnamed species and emphasise the protection of populations within certain distinct regional communities with high levels of species richness and endemism. At least two taxon under investigation, Galagoides cf. cocos and G. sp. nov. 2, resides within an area of special attention (Eastern Arc Mountains, Tanzania).
Living in a nocturnal world has forced galagos to develop other senses than vision for social communication. Their evolutionary history equipped them for a life in darkness through promotion of senses not dependent of light, i.e. vocal and olfactory senses (Bearder et al., 1995; Clarke, 1978). It is recognized that each taxa of Galagidae has its own species specific vocal repertoire with very little interspecific overlap (Zimmermann et al., 1988; Bearder et al., 1995; Honess & Bearder, 1996). Once researchers discovered this phenomenon, more and more evidence of the Galagidae species rich diversity emerged from the dark. The use of vocal cues for species recognition has been an accepted and used method for research for other taxon e.g. birds (Naguib, 2005), amphibians (Grafe, 2005), insects (Cokl, 2003; Poulet, 2005) and mammals including several primate taxon (McComb & Reby, 2005), but it was a novel approach to nocturnal primate research. Once the difficult process of how to recognise nocturnal, cryptic species was made relatively easy through vocal recognition, research efforts could be more focused on behavioural, genetic, morphological and ecological studies since the study object could be identified momentarily when encountered.
The importance of vocal field identification of galagos can not be understated. Since the interspecific variability is marginal and only associated with certain types of alarm calls (Bearder et al., 1995) it can also be considered as a very important character for taxonomic species description (Honess & Bearder, 1996; Courtenay & Bearder, 1989; Ambrose 2003). Somewhere around 13-14 new species has been recognized on the basis of their vocal repertoire over the past decade (Grubb et al., 2003) and more discoveries are most likely to occur as more field research is conducted. Two of the most recent discoveries and subjects for this study, Galagoides cf. cocos and G. sp. nov. 1 were identified as separate species on the basis of their vocalisation (Grubb et al., 2003). Regarding two of the other potential targets of this study, G. sp. nov. 2 and G. sp. nov 3, vocal recordings are absent or inadequate to be used for analysis but are highly sought for to complete species descriptions (Grubb et al. , 2003).
Genetic studies provide important information on species phylogenetic relationships and are very useful as diagnostic tools for species descriptions. The most widely used methods involve analysis and comparing of specific regions of mitochondrial or nuclear DNA-strands. This is an advanced method for assessing genetic differences within and between species, but the scarcity of available data and relatively high costs for analysis restrains it use for comparisons between species in order to assess taxonomic rank for this project. A more useful genetic method in this respect is analyses of karyotypes, i.e. the chromosomal make-up. The reasons are two-fold, (1) Galagidae species show great interspecific variation for this trait (De Boer, 1973; Masters, 1986; Stanyon et al., 1992), making its use for species description is very candid, and (2) it is a relatively cost effective genetic analysis. Unfortunately, karyotyping has fallen out of 'fashion' in favour for the more elaborate molecular methods. Looking back ten years in time, no new taxa within the Galagidae family has been karyotyped, in spite of its known value as diagnostic tool in species descriptions. Field researchers have, albeit, often collected genetic material of their new discoveries, it is just a matter of analysing it (e.g. Perkin, 2001).
The most established way to taxonomically distinguish taxa is through morphological comparisons. The most pertinent evidence of that fact within the Galagidae family comes from Olson 's (1979) morphological analyses of museum specimens. His research resulted in a suggested existence of more than twice the known number of Galagidae species from five to eleven (Nash et al., 1989). There is little doubt to the importance of morphological characters importance in species descriptions. However, the diagnostic value of a certain morphological trait for species specification varies between taxa. In diurnal species, where vision plays a major role for social interactions, it is likely that pelage colour and pelage patterns is species specific and hence, useful as species descriptors (Jones et al., 2005; Sinha et al., 2005; Thalmann & Geissman, 2000). For nocturnal species, where vision plays a minor role for social interactions, the traits of most importance as diagnostic tools have to be found on a different functional level. For members of the Galagidae taxa penile and hand pad morphology has been shown to be highly species specific traits (Anderson, 1999, 2000; Anderson et al., 2000). The latter trait can be retrieved from well preserved museum specimens (Anderson, 1999) but soft tissue parts, such as penises, are rarely intact on these specimens. New data on penile morphology could, however, be retrieved from ongoing field research.
Areas in central and western Africa are regions of high species diversity (Baille et al. , 2004) and house many of the Galagidae taxon. The coastal regions of Kenya and Tanzania (The Eastern Arc Mountains) are designated as one of the world 's 25 biodiversity hotspots (Baille et al., 2004) and are also the home two of this projects targeted taxon: Galagoides cf. cocos (Perkin et al., 2002; Butynski, 2004) and G. sp. nov 2 (Groves, 2001). These are both taxon that previously was considered subspecies but recent field research has given strong incentives to elevate their taxonomic status (Grubb et al., 2003). The discovery of these two new species of galagos in addition to the recent discovery of the monkey Lophocebus kipunji (Jones et al., 2005) highlights the importance of further research within these relatively unexplored biodiversity hotspots. With the full recognition of these new galago species through designation of scientific names, I am certain that future research efforts concerning galagos will gain much more attention.
The main issue addressed by this project is the problem of keeping current taxonomy up to speed on newly discovered Galagidae taxon. In a scientific competitive climate the most  'sexy' projects are the ones most likely to get a piece of the scarce funding cake. Projects' involving taxonomic topics lies quite far from the main stream interest of funding agencies and, hence, get set floating behind. Field researchers, the discoverers of new species, are allotted a certain limited budget that will cover the costs their project was set out for, but will not allow for extra-curriculum activities, such as description of an 'accidentally' discovered new species, provides. The stiff competition for extra funding and the likeliness of application failure shifts the researchers focus and efforts towards projects more likely of success.
This project aims to aid with the catching up of the taxonomic lag and try to emphasise the importance of taxonomy as a scientific field and conservation tool.
With additional knowledge about an areas' biodiversity, measured as number of species, protection and conservation efforts aimed to preserve its pristine state are more likely to gain impetus toward its cause. Awareness raised by discoveries of new species is highly variable. A new charismatic primate is more likely to boost conservation efforts compared to the discovery of a new species of earth worm or caterpillar, irrespectively of the taxa 's importance for the ecosystem.
To have two or more phylogenetically closely related taxon living sympatrically with such delicate habitat niche division as Galagidae is very interesting when approached from an evolutionary perspective. What evolutionary forces and mechanisms has put this group of nocturnal primates to inhabit the same habitat without apparent interspecific conflicts and interbreeding? The novelty and diverseness of Galagidae behaviour and taxonomy are most likely to raise many more questions of scientific character and hence, attract students and researchers from many different scientific fields to study this extraordinary primate family and its vast character assortment.
To describe a new species and to name includes several procedures and process that has to be completed. The work conducted can be divided into theoretical and practical methods with overlapping momentums. For the theoretical section, information on appropriate nomenclature and its etymology, biogeography, morphology and behaviour will be collected. The practical section will be examining morphology, vocal repertoire and karyotype of the taxon under investigation. All data collected will serve its purpose in description of the new taxa and guide the researcher towards a correct assessment of holotype (type specimen). However, to establish the uniqueness of the taxa under investigation, comparisons have to be made with established taxon. Preferably, the taxa/taxon used for comparison should be as phylogenetically closely related to the taxa under investigation as possible. Research done on each theoretical method listed below (except Nomenclature and Etymology) and the practical method "Genetics" also applies for the taxa/taxon chosen for comparison.
This section will be conducted using resources from Oxford Brookes University Library, U.K., Oxford University Library, U.K., and Internet.
There are recommendations and guidelines on the appropriateness and availability of names (International Code of Zoological Nomencalture - ICZN, 1999). If the proposed taxa is/have been known at a lower taxonomic level or renamed at some point in time, that allotted name would be used which also mean that the authorship of that name is dedicated the original descriptor. Establishment of the original nomenclature source is found in historical literature.
Historical and present geographical distribution and detailed habitat use of the taxa in question will be collected from literature. This data are of most importance as diagnostic variable ("unit of evolution") for assessing phylogenetic relationships (Cracraft, 1997).
Measures have been conducted on one taxa, G. cf. cocos, in several studies under the assumption that it was a different taxa under investigation (Bearder, pers. comm.). Hence, there ought to exist data on the species in the literature on body weight, body length, tail length, hind foot, ear height, cranial and skeletal measurements, hand pad morphology, and pelage colour patterns. If this situation applies to other unnamed taxon is unknown but will be investigated.
In light of the information presented above in the "Morphology" section, it is equally likely that data on social group size, social behaviour, reproduction, vocalization, diet, locomotion, and activity patterns is available on G. cf. cocos in published materials.
It exist museum specimens of G. cf. cocos in museum collections under false label (Bearder, pers. comm.) making measurements and description of cranial and postcranial skeletal elements, pelage colours and patterns and hand pad morphology possible. Skeletal measurements and pelage descriptions will be taken in accordance with established and previously used standard measurement procedures for prosimian primates (Nekaris 2005 - Module Handbook; Olson 1979). Assembling of hand pad morphology data will follow Anderson (1999) collection methods.
The skeletal elements will be measured with a calliper and a measurement tape to the nearest 0.1 millimetre. Each measurement will be averaged from three consecutive measurements of each skeletal element.
The pelage colour and quality will be described for head, trunk and extremities. Colour patterns will be as elaborately described as possible, especially facial masks. Description will be complimented with colour digital photographs taken with an Olympus C740UZ Ultra Zoom including a colour chart next to specimen to enable correct colour identification.
Details of hand pad morphology will be recorded with the aid of a video recording camera. To enable correct measurements from recordings the specimen extremity capture footage will include a millimetre scale enabling postscript measurements. Video images will be digitized using a PC or Macintosh with an image grabber board. Individual hand pad measurements, area of each hand pad and their relative position to each other on the sole of hand and foot will be recorded for left side extremities. Analysis of measurements will be conducted using proper image analysis software. The lopsided measuring of hand pads is an arbitral choice of side to avoid pseudoreplication.
The most useful behavioural method for galago species identification involves their vocal repertoires. The reliability of interspecifity in loud calls used in social contexts is well documented (see Nekaris & Bearder, 2005 for a review) and, hence, more and more used in Galagidae taxonomy.
Vocal recordings are available for G. cf. cocos (Bearder, pers. comm.) and will be analysed for intra-and interspecific variability with Avisoft-SASLab Pro (Avisoft Bioacustics). The vocal parameters that will be used for comparisons are in accordance with other similar studies (Anderson 1999; Zimmermann 1990):
Karyotyping is a very useful and powerful diagnostic tool for species denomination. There are tissue samples available for chromosome extraction (Bearder, pers. comm.) and karyotyping for several Galagidae taxon, G. cf. cocos included. One of the leading scientists within the field of karyotyping, Professor Yves Rumpler, Universit   Louis Pasteur, Paris, France, has confirmed his assistance and use of laboratory for this purpose. The exact procedure used at this laboratory for extraction and analysis of chromosome material for karyotyping is not yet established due to lack of information on laboratory facilities. However, confirmation of karyotyping procedures will be received once Professor Yves Rumpler returns to his office from a field trip (17 th of December, 2005).
An approximate timeline for each major activity can be found in Table 1. The proposed time for writing up the MSc thesis encompasses 2 months before and 2 months after the timeline given in Table 1. To validate the research effort and officially name the taxa/taxon under investigation, time will be set aside during and after Table 1 Timeline to compose manuscripts for peer reviewed and publications.
Control for body size (either measured as body weight or head-body length) for each variable will be done using major axis regression analysis (Andersonal. 2000; Sokal & Rohlf 1981).
Morphological data, hand pad area and vocal parameters that are measured on a continuous scale will be analysed for intraspecific variation using ANOVA. Post hoc analysis will be Newman-Keuls pair-test.
Morphological data, hand pad area and vocal parameters that are measured on a continuous scale will be analysed for interspecific variation using nested ANOVA. This will allow for parting of data on species and population level. Post hoc analysis will be Newman-Keuls pair-test.
Additional cluster analyses will be conducted for confirmation of specificity of collected data.
Morphological data, hand pad area and vocal parameters measured on a discrete scale will be analysed for intra-and interspecific variation using Mann Whitney U-test. Post hoc analysis will either be Bonferroni adjustment, Nemenyi/Dunn test or what is considered appropriate after consulting statistical expertise.
Part of the goal with the project is to create a factual database over the family Galagidae. The free software computer software Taxis 3.5 () will be used for this purpose.
The cooperation with respective field 's scientific authorities is essential for a wide spanning project as this. The project outcome is resting on these peoples and organisations shoulders and their integrative contribution will add the extra information not available in literature.
On-going field work by Dr Andrew Perkin provides new and diagnostically valuable behavioural, genetic and distributional data on this study 's target species.
The leading primate taxonomist Professor Peter Grubb will assert his guidance and knowledge which will be of invaluable importance in interpreting and assessing the collected data. With many years of experience in the field of taxonomy and naming of new species, Professor Grubbs' knowledge will help this study to avoid the most obvious fallacies and pitfalls made in taxonomic research.
Several museum collections will be investigated and utilised for this project. Without their professional expertise and kind compliance, the foundation of species description, collection of morphological character data, will be severely weighed down.
One principal component of this study is the analysis of the target taxon 's karyotype. Examination of genetic material requires special laboratory equipment and expertise knowledge to interpret the results. With the kind offer from Professor Yves Rumpler, Universit   Louis Pasteur, France, these requirements are more than fulfilled. The laboratory under Professor Rumplers' lead has many years of experience in karyotyping of nocturnal primate taxon. Their contribution is of outmost importance for this study 's success.
The species identification process is of interest for many different individuals and organisations. This is especially true within the scientific community and within conservation agencies. When a new taxa is discovered the general knowledge about its behaviour and geographic distribution is bound, by virtue of its novelty, to be limited. However, certain traits of the Galagidae taxon are relatively easy to collect (e.g. vocalisations) and their diagnostic value for species description is comparatively high. To further ascertain vocal repertoires importance in the species denomination process will speed up the process of specific identification and description for new Galagidae taxon. Positive identification will enable and interest other researchers to confirm the new findings in independent studies. More information is collected and the actual process of naming the new species is made possible.
A common way for conservation agencies to speak for preservation of pristine habitats is through emphasis of their high biodiversity. Biodiversity can be measured in several ways (Purvis & Hector, 2000):
When lobbying with governmental officials for conservation of habitats, the last measure (Number) is likely to be the most effective and is the most commonly used feature for describing species richness. Hence, addition of new species names will have a positive effect for any conservation effort taken.
Since the process of naming a new species includes several obligatory predetermined steps, the evaluation of the project progress is more or less integrated in the work process. The steps involved are: literature review, morphological analysis and description and intra- and interspecific character analysis and comparisons. The literature review of each species will sort out what type of research that has been done and enable a ranking of the probability for successful species specific description, e.g. if the species only has been seen once and ten minutes of vocal recordings are available, one is most likely to fail in any attempt to validate its taxonomic status at species level. Once the first cut is made, progress of the project will be monitored and evaluated by means of each predetermined analysis completion.
Following the completion of the various intra-and interspecific analyses the picture of the projects overall success will gradually emerge. The project will be considered a success if a new species can, unambiguously, be labeled with a Latin binominal name. The process of writing up a paper for publication for the project outcome is then merely a matter of labor. However, if the interspecific comparisons reveal that we are not dealing with a new species, any data that has been extracted on the species from the project in terms of biogeography, morphology, behaviour or genetics is considered as partial project success. Any character description derived will be incorporated in a database and will most likely be use for future taxonomic surveys.
An integral part of the process of describing new species includes publicly presenting your results. This means that the results should be readily available in scientific literature according to the rules of The International Code of Zoological Nomenclature (ICZN, 1999) to be valid. The information about the new species name will thereby be accessible for anyone interested, however, most likely only raise attention in the scientific community and within conservation agencies. Since researchers and conservation agencies often are active in the species habitat countries it is most likely that their awareness of the new species will channel the news of its presence to the local governments. Hopefully, the response from the government will lead to increased habitat protection, i.e. raise awareness of the new species recognition within rural communities. The discovery of new primate species, per se, is also an event opting to attract media attention.
I have approached the following grant agency:
Grants-in-Aid of Research, The Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology.
Result of application is pending.
The University covers costs related to computer software usage and support. Costs exceeding external funding sources will be covered by personal financial contributions.
