When Derrida famously declared that 'There is nothing outside the text', his words would have implications not only for literary theorists but for those 'guardians' of literature itself: publishers. Post-Structuralist theory states that a written text is unstable, in an entirely textual world: we cannot talk of a 'real' world outside of language, a cultural reality represented by a work of literature. This, along with the Post-Structuralist theory of the 'Death of the Author' challenges the publisher 's traditional role as conservationist of culture, a role that relies on both the intrinsic value of the text and its ability to represent a specific cultural period. Derrida 's denial that a written text has any intrinsic worth renders the publisher 's role as gatekeeper obsolete. As what Richard Abel describes as a 'cultural gatekeeper', the publisher preserves the text as a valuable cultural commodity, insisting upon the posthumous life of the Author. Furthermore, the modernist desire to preserve the intrinsic worth of books by fighting against the commercialisation of the publishing industry has no place in Post-Structuralist theory, where the decentred commercial universe of the 21 st century offers a textual liberation and plurality that can only be celebrated. Must Peter Barry 's surmise that Post-Structuralism 's "torch of scepticism burns away the intellectual ground on which Western civilisation is built" then bring to mind a bonfire of our literary heritage? Or can the publishing industry and its products be reconciled to Post-Structuralism in our modern world?.
Richard Abel 'The Book Publisher 's Cultural Role' Logos Vol.7.
Peter Barry Beginning Theory 2nd Edition (Manchester University Press 2002) p.65.
The cultural value of the work of literature came into question with the advent of Structuralism in the 20 th century, which declared that "meanings are attributed to the things by the human mind, not contained within them". Therefore according to Structuralist thinking a literary work has no intrinsic value: there is nothing stable or lasting for the publisher to preserve. Saussure emphasised that the meanings we give to the very words themselves are arbitrary, maintained by convention alone: convention that upholds both publisher and author as guardians and producers of priceless cultural artefacts. In Mythologies, Structuralist Roland Barthes exposes the literary text as not natural but historical- while the publisher seems to suggest literary works are intrinsically valuable, they are in fact historically contingent. However, Structuralist theory allows that individual literary works might represent "some larger, abstract structures which contain them"; the culture that produced them, for instance. In this case, it might be valid to describe the publisher as a preserver of culture, a gatekeeper. Language constitutes our world, a novel not merely recording contemporary culture, but creating it.
Barry Beginning Theory p.39.
Yet in exploring the full implications of this theory, Post-Structuralism renders and exposes the literary text as fundamentally meaningless. Derrida 's declaration that "There is nothing outside the text" implies that the text is that culture it claims to represent, but with so many varied and contradictory works of literature existing within any given period this offers an inherently unstable and unreliable notion of culture. The idea that language shapes our world means that this world is rendered one of "radical uncertainty" and fixed intellectual reference points, including literary texts, are removed forever. Reality is indeed textual, but this means that it is impossible to achieve any knowledge through language: a book cannot really say anything about its contemporary culture. As an eternal cultural sign, the text is meaningless, losing its historical contingency:
Barry Beginning Theory p.61.
Roland Barthes Mythologies (Vintage 2000, first published by Jonathan Cape 1972) p.117.
So where does this leave the publisher, the 'cultural gatekeeper'? By postulating the text as an eternal cultural sign he in fact renders it meaningless, and ironically makes his own role as textual guardian obsolete. It is impossible to 'control' language: the publisher cannot guard or control a literary text, which is merely "linguistic liquid, slopping about and swilling over unpredictably." Indeed, Barthes rejects the very concept of Literature, proposing that "According to our norms, this Literature is an undoubted mythical system" wherein the discourse and its expression in writing combine to create the myth that is the 'literary discourse', or Literature with a capital L: the cultural texts the publisher claims to protect .Both text and publisher have little place as cultural artefact and curator in a Post-Structuralist world.
Barry Beginning Theory p.64.
Barthes Mythologies p.134.
Post-Structuralism maintains that just as a text can tell us nothing about its cultural context, an utterance, textual or otherwise, tells us nothing about the author 's consciousness. For Barthes, this assertion of the freedom of a literary text from the author 's intention was the turning point from Structuralism to Post-Structuralism. In his essay 'The Death of the Author' he declares that the literary work is in fact undetermined by intention or context, the onus shifting from author and publisher to reader in an escape from all forms of textual authority. As readers, we produce the text, and there is in fact no 'real' cultural description or emotional state to reconstruct. Yet when a publisher uses the author to publicise a book at a book signing or promotion, he gives him authority as a 'god-like' figure. In fact, at the 2006 London Book Fair, Canadian author Margaret Atwood demonstrated new 'Long Pen' technology that will allow an author to sign a book anywhere in the world from the comfort of his or her own home, suggesting an almost omnipotent authorial presence. Barthes attacked this 'myth' of the writer as early as 1972 when he derided the bourgeois ideal of writers as "specialists of the human soul" or "professionals of inspiration". The writer takes on a sort of god-like essence as Author, creator, indeed "a kind of intrinsically different being" and this is in fact emphasised by the promotion a publisher encourages for him, details of the author 's life publicised in order to make his artistic products all the more miraculous, even 'divine'. Barthes describes how novelists are immortalised and seen as  'spiritual representatives' of society: protected, Abel would surely say, by the publisher who is the  'spiritual gatekeeper'. The paternal nature of the publishing industry is antithetical to Post-Structuralist emphasis on the text as self-sufficient and plural: posthumous copyright, lasting seventy years after the author 's literal death, moral rights of paternity and so on are all tied up in author-publisher contracts and insist upon the legal authority of both author and publisher. Foucault drew attention to the way that literary authorship has been bound up with copyright law and legal ownership of texts in his essay 'What is an Author?' (1969) When an author asserts his moral rights of paternity at the beginning of the text he is solidified from a "haunting but unspecified presence" into a very real and specific figure. This is comforting insofar that it offers the notion "that there is a particular sense to that text", yet it means that he or she can no longer be a reader 's personal projection but assumes an objective authority. We become one more "inert consumer to the author 's [and of course publisher 's] role as producer". Yet in light of Derrida 's declaration that an author is "dead insofar as his text has a structure of survival even if he is living" the Death of the Author might seem to be highlighted by copyright law,.
Barthes Mythologies p.29.
Barthes Mythologies p.30.
Andrew Bennett & Nicholas Royle Introduction to Literature, Criticism and Theory 2nd Ed (Prentice Hall Europe 1999) p.20.
Michel Foucault 'What is an Author?' in Textual Strategies: Perspectives in Post-Structuralist Criticism ed. Josue V. Harari (Methuen 1979) p.149.
Terence Hawkes Metaphor (Methuen 1972).
Jacques Derrida 'Des Tours de Babel' trans. .Joseph F. Graham, in Difference in Translation, ed. Graham (Ithaca: Cornell University Press 1985) p.183.
Bennett & Royle Introduction p.26.
However, what we are actually seeing in this publishing law is a shift of authority from the author to the publisher: the text is still the legal property of the publisher seventy years after the writer 's death. Indeed, the writer might merely be said to be sharing his power: his moral rights remain for this entire period and can last for an infinite period of time if the author 's estate continues to pay a fee??? The publishing industry and its laws help to immortalise the Author. Post-Structuralist Barbara Johnson promotes the deliberate identification and dismantling (or 'deconstructing', to use a Post-Structuralism term) of this source of textual power. Indeed, Post-Structuralism attempts to specifically deconstruct the 'myth' of the Author, Barthes discussing this figure as a product of a "second-order semiological system", the publisher preserving not our literary heritage but a mythology, a false ideal of the author as a demiurgic creator of the text. According to Post-Structuralist thinking, the publisher does not protect a representation of our culture, but is the protector of a bourgeois mythology.
Barbara Johnson The Critical Difference (John Hopkins University Press 1980).
Yet while publicity and marketing may construct the author as a false god-like figure, the commercialisation of the industry is not always antagonistic to Post-Structuralism. In some ways, the publisher is the Post-Structuralist 's best friend. Abel 's essay centres on the publisher as what he calls IBP, 'Ingenious Book Publisher', a combination of author and editor. In confusing the role of author, editor, copy-editors etc Abel (probably unintentionally) undermines the single authoritarian voice of the author and thus encourages the plurality of the text. The increased involvement of the publishing house in creating the text itself as a marketable, profitable commodity removes the central power of the author and moves towards intertextuality, editor, marketer and so on all involved in 'writing' the text. This suggests Barthes' 'writerly' text: "the more indeterminate the origin of the statement, the more plural the text." In this case, the publisher frees the writing from the conventional impositions of authorship, and takes on a Post-Structuralist role. The treatment of literary production as "a sort of involuntary secretion" described by Barthes is destroyed in the commercial world of the 21 st century, where the writer is the producer of a commodity like any other, writing for money rather than because he or she is "prey of an inner god who speaks at all times." 'Muse' has been replaced by a whole publishing machine of marketers and editors who extract the book from the compliant author.
Roland Barthes S/Z trans. Richard Miller (Blackwell 1990).
Barthes Mythologies p.30.
Barthes Mythologies p.30.
We saw that one strong argument for the publisher and author as authoritative owners of a literary text and its meaning is that of ownership law . However, moral rights only hold real authority on the continent, in countries like France which maintain a Civil Law system. In the commercial trading grounds of the UK and US moral rights can be bought and sold, the author waiving his rights in order to allow his text to generate the maximum profit. Indeed in the US, copyright itself belongs to the highest bidder not automatically to the author or publisher. Even in the UK copyright is increasingly being undermined by new technology such as the internet, where open access is removing the publisher literally as gatekeepers and allowing unlimited, free and uncontrolled access to the text. For publisher Nigel Newton this is a "cultural concern", his phrase explicitly linking digitisation of literature with the potential demise of cultural gate keeping. Ted Nelson describes a similar opposition, yet celebrates a vision for 2020 where.
Nigel Newton 'Google 's Literary Land-Grab' The Guardian (4th March 2006).
Ted Nelson 'Opening Hypertext: a Memoir' Literacy Online ed. M.C. Tuman (University of Pittsburgh Press 1992) p.44.
Organizations like Creative Commons promote the 'creative re-use' of intellectual works, those that are 'owned' as well as in the public domain, by offering publishers a license to allow people to copy and distribute their work even when it is in copyright. This is seen by many as a step towards the abolition of copyright itself, publishing with Creative Commons allowing the reader to physically manipulate, use and interpret a text in any way he or she wants, so long as the publisher gains credit for it. Newton attacks such projects, protesting that "Dickens is n't around to defen d the integrity of his work. Were he alive he would certainly have tried." Yet in drawing attention to the way that the author loses his voice in the digitisation of his texts Newton is explicitly lamenting the Death of the Author and his loss of authority over the literary work: ideas central to Post-Structuralism. Movements like Creative Commons support the Post-Structuralist idea of a 'readerly' text, as do the growing concepts of self-publishing, print on demand, the long tail and blogging: all these developments are challenging the traditional concept of the writer as a member of the ruling 'elite'. It is no longer valid to claim that 'not everybody can write', because in the 21 st century pretty much anybody can. Balestri and Joyce propose that.
Newton 'Google 's Literary Land-Grab'.
S. Moulthrop 'The Politics of Hypertext' Evolving Perspectives on Computers and Composition Studies: Questions for the 1990s eds. Hawisher & Selfe (National Council of Teachers of English, Urbana 1991) p.267.
Technological changes are transforming the role of the publisher and his authors, and revolutionising his products. The rise of repositories on the internet and digitisation of assets means that there is now a mass of textual data available to the reader, and this is increasingly hard to navigate and control. A hypertext document, for instance, "may be so open, interconnected and reader-controlled that users could be overwhelmed by the multiplicity of choices". We witness in this wealth of information a loss of individual voice, search engines and now projects like Google Print and Amazon 's 'Read Inside the Book' offering extracts of text detached from the full literary work and its original published unity. Online hypertexts allow readers to move from one piece of text to another immediately, without sequence: Snyder infers that "Hypertext consequently blurs the boundaries between readers and writers" by allowing readers to make their own connections and produce their own meanings. They are no longer dictated to by the printed text (or more specifically, the typographer/publisher who created it). The centre and end of online literature is absent, without clear boundaries, the extent of hypertext unknowable and multi-authored. For the Post-Structuralist, this is something to be celebrated, the linking of multiple interpretations and voices a democratic triumph, breaking down artificial divisions and resulting in better communication. Indeed, direct parallels can be drawn between hypertext technology and literary theory, the fields "converged" as the text is visibly deconstructed on the computer screen. Johnson-Eilola explains that hypertext forces writer and reader to.
Ilana Snyder 'Beyond the Hype: Reassessing Hypertext' Page to Screen: Taking Literacy into the Electronic Era ed. Snyder (Routledge ???? ) p.128.
Snyder Page to Screen p.127.
G.P Landow Hypertext: The Convergence of Contemporary Critical Theory and Technology (Johns Hopkins University Press 1992) p.3.
J Johnson-Eilola 'Control and Cyborg: Writing and Being Written in Hypertext' Journal of Advanced Composition vol.13, no.2 (1993) p.382.
In fact, Douglas claims that Barthes and Derrida "uncannily anticipated" electronic text in their definitions of the postmodern text. It seems that as the printed surface becomes "volatile and interactive" the very 'text' that our culture is built upon is called into question: in a digital and commercial age, literature becomes part of a decentred, incoherent and inherently Post-Structuralist universe. Google 's claim that this is "all for the global cultural heritage" suggests that with our literary culture (and this means literature with a small l) all around us, a cultural gatekeeper is no longer necessary or desirable.
J. Y. Douglas 'Social Impacts of computing: the framing of Hypertext- Revolutionary for Whom?' Social Science Computer Review vol.2 no.4 (1993) p.423.
R.A. Lanham The Electronic Word: Democracy, Technology and the Arts (University of Chicago Press 1993) p.73.
Newton 'Google 's Literary Land-Grab'.
Furthermore, in advertising and marketing campaigns the publisher deliberately places the text in new contexts so that it can yield up new meanings, abdicating his role as gatekeeper. Any discourse cited by publisher or author can, as Derrida predicted,.
Jacques Derrida Of Grammatology trans. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak (Johns Hopkins University Press 1976).
Internet channels like Amazon allow the publisher to advertise new texts in conjunction with a whole network of new and backlist books, reaching a variety of different readers. Publisher Nigel Newton resents the way our 'great literature' is being sold alongside medical and travel advertisements yet many publishers are embracing the opportunities that linking Jekyll and Hyde with "a walk-in medical clinic" might offer them. Newton may be right that Dickens would have taken issue with his readers being sold modern romantic comedy alongside Great Expectations, but in the commercialised 21 st century industry books are promoted in ways that do not necessarily value the original aims of the author. Instead the aim is to sell the text to as many as possible, through many different channels. It is the nature of advertising itself to appeal to as many different consciousnesses as possible, on many different levels. The requirements of commercial consumerism remove the words from the author 's consciousness at the time of writing, undermining the sense that his writing is emotionally or linguistically 'real': it matters little if the text is genuine or meaningful so long as it sells.
Newton 'Google 's Literary Land-Grab'.
This supports Derrida 's claim that in reading and interpreting a text we are not just reproducing what the author thought at the time of writing: a theory that seems to be acknowledged by the publishing industry in the 21 st century. The author no longer dictating how the text is read: in marketing campaigns the publisher encourages multiple readings of his or her words in order to appeal to different market groups. (Ansoff Matrix) There are no certain genuine facts here, only interpretations. No stable authority exists to validate our interpretations in this universe; we cannot ask the author, publisher or even the marketing team what a book or advertisement actually means. This suggests the Post-Structuralist idea of a 'decentred' relativistic universe, where meaning has free play in a Nietzschean world of, in this case commercial, significations. Far from lamenting this loss of control, publishers use it to their advantage in order to sell books to an ever expanding market and reach new and unexpected segments. As Barthes asserted, "the more indeterminate the origin of the statement, the more plural the text". Harry Potter was initially promoted to children, but it was discovered that it appealed to both children and adults despite the latter market group not being one J K Rowling originally intended to write her book for. Yet publishers picked up on the new meanings adults read into the books and produced an adult cover to maximise promotion. The book took on new meanings and reached a wider market. Rather than causing a lack of diversity and a homogenisation of literature (as lamented by Modernists like ???) the promotion of books as commodities actually allows diverse, multiple readings in a truly Post-Structuralist sense. The publisher is encouraged to take risks, and to increase profits by targeting new markets with new products.
The role of the publisher as gatekeeper of literature is thus becoming redundant in the technological and cultural context of the 21 st century. The publisher and his products are becoming part of a Post-Structuralist utopia, where commercial and digital demands promote intertextuality, decentring and the Death of the Author. Terry Eagleton 's rhetorical passage in his Literary Theory: An Introduction seems to voice the last lament of the cultural gatekeeper and his author;.
Terry Eagleton Literary Theory: An Introduction 2nd Ed. (Blackwell 1996) p.121.
It seems that it is only by embracing literature as a commercial commodity and discarding it as an 'artefact' that the author and publisher can continue to function. The publisher must accept that his products cannot be guarded, but must be liberated and dissipated to the 'mass', our "profit-hungry, anodyne culture". Thus in this cynical, commercial age the publisher can be seen in many ways as a champion of Post-Structuralist ideology, and the two figures not such uneasy bedfellows after all.
Eagleton Literary Theory p.121.
