Rapidly growing e-commerce, tied with increasingly global Business-to-Consumer interface by way of modern ICTs, continues to attract the interest of firms and customers (Buhalis, 2003, La et al., 2002). In this context, distribution, or channel strategy, relates to tourism and hospitality as a critical factor of competitiveness (Buhalis, 2001a; Lynch, 2003). The aim of this assignment is thus put into view; how can companies monopolize on ICT and Electronic Distribution to gain competitive advantages. The assignment presents an international travel package, examined through 3 distribution channels subsequently discussed, evaluated to relevant theories from a consumer and business perspective to determine the comparative effectiveness of each channel.
Consult Appendices 1 & 2 for Distribution Illustration and Relevant terms Glossary.
Travel plans require the gathering of numerous sources of information on particular destinations; thus the intangibility, and distance, of such products is a considerable emotional investment, irreplaceable if anything goes wrong (Buhalis et al. , 2001b, O'Connor, 1999; La et al, 2002). Tourism distribution hence consists in providing sufficient information, combination, and travel plan services via suitable and accessible points-of-sale (Buhalis, 2001a; Middleton et al., 2001). Globalisation, the theory of converging markets in response to modernity, intensifies information demand; and so, distribution channels are effective tools to ease decision-making, and reduce perceived risks (Buhalis, 2001a; Levitt, 1983). Until the early 90 's electronic distribution channels were described as 'a cosy status quo between the CRSs and the GDSs'; used by the airline industry and later adopted by tourism and hospitality (Buhails et al. , 2001b; O'Connor, 2004, p.185). Despite an evolutionary link between the two, CRSs leading to GDSs, connecting growing numbers of these systems often proved costly and technical; often requiring a Switch to translate transactions into a compatible, computer language (O'Conner, 2004). Despite lucrative mass bookings, these distribution channels proved expensive and inflexible; particularly in marketing more dynamic, and complex, hotel products versus simpler, stable, airline seats (Buhalis et al. , 2001b; O'Connor, 2004).
While such channels still exist, suppliers seek faster, economical, more direct means to distribute information to evermore demanding tourists (Buhalis et al. , 2001b). As a result tourism and ICT developments, are closely interrelated and unclear as to which industry depends on the other (Buhalis, 2003; Law et al., 2004; Middleton et al., 2001). Even so, global reach, information access speed and richness, rely on continued ICT progress; that is, a demand for precise and quickly flowing information throughout the tourism industry needs ICT progress to ease these functions (Buhalis, 2003; O'Connor, 1999).
Consult Appendices 1 & 2 for Distribution Illustration and Relevant terms Glossary.
Initially created to aid research groups, the internet has grown considerably as a global marketing platform; where firms and consumers rapidly and effectively exchange information, products, and services (La et al. , 2002; May, 2000; O'Connor, 1999). Thus, the travel and tourism industry with its propensity to seek information on services and products, tied with increased tourism demand; has placed the Internet as one of the industry 's most used communication and distribution channels (Middleton et al. , 2001; Law et al. , 2004; Wynne et al., 2001). The Web allows suppliers to directly target the desired consumers at any time and location with an internet connection; achievable by lower distribution costs with desirable speed and flexibility (Middleton et al. , 2001; Law et al. , 2004). Conversely, some suppliers benefit from outsourcing services to third-party retailers; who may in turn increase global reach and awareness by indirect marketing (La et al., 2002). While core consumer needs remain unaffected, the Web has reformed the exchange of information through accessible websites; empowering travellers to arrange, evaluate, and perform their own transactions at any given time from, almost, any location with suitable web connections (Middleton et al. 2001; O'Connor, 1999; La et al., 2002; Law et al. , 2004; Wynne et al. , 2001).
While considerable information is available, finding relevant and credible subject material can be complicated by the relatively unstructured nature of the web (O'Conner, 2004). The additional, unbridled, user presence and demand tied with more information-rich websites now sees more detailed graphics, videos, and sound that take up considerable loading time (O'Conner, 2004). A more serious issue for both consumers and firms is exposure to increasingly open societies and potential dangers of cyber-crime (Chou et al., 1999; Smith, 2004). Excluding the many viruses that can infect computers, personal data and credit card numbers may be fraudulently misused; gained through deceit or by cracking (Chaffey, 2002; May, 2000; O'Conner, 2004). Combating such acts includes offering secure dealings with encryption and security software, such as SSL and SET (Chaffey, 2002; O'Connor, 2004). Even so, such crimes harm individuals financially, but more so by creating distrust in an already fragile relationship; the theory being the lack of social presence in online transactions hinders the development of loyalty, which suffers further by such crimes (Gefen et al. 2003; May, 2000; Reichweld et al. , 2000). A recent issue is a growing concern to meet Web Accessibility guidelines and make web content accessible to disabled people (WAI, 1999). Overall, the web promotes business encounters and global trade of information, yet payment and relationship building remain problematic; delaying e-commerce practice by firms and acceptance by consumers (May, 2000).
Firms may attempt to personalize online visits and build relationships of trust by recognizing users between encounters; known as eCRM (Jelassi, 2005; May, 2000). This may require firms to track purchase patterns, and build geo-demographic databases by way of cookies and online registration forms (Jelassi, 2005; May, 2000). Yet users may oppose such tactics on the basis of invasion of privacy, or the latter case, lack of time or devotion to fill out forms or disclose information (Chaffey et al. , 2003; May, 2000). Moreover, while firms many use this data to e-mail consumers with similar product and service information, the connotation of this method relates to unsolicited mail or SPAM (Chaffey et al. , 2003). While e-commerce can use traditional trust building relationships their success is arguable; the theory being the lack of face-to-face contact cannot be replaced by computers (Papadopoulou et al, 2001). Efficient e-branding thus emphasizes a more social online presence with virtual societies, user comments, and other receptive tools to ease interaction and build trust (Gefen et al. , 2003; McCole, 2002). Yet risk to brand equity through minimal awareness and poor web-design can demote perceived quality and brand association; ultimately deterring brand loyalty (Aaker et al. , 2000 cited in Chaffey et al., 2003). Firms thus need to carefully consider moving online, either by modified brand identity or other means including partnerships, extended brands, or new-digital brands (Chaffey et al., 2003).
As stated, internet provides firms direct global and economic control of distribution, together with involving consumers in incorporating their values into a transaction (Paraskevas, 2005; Tapscott et al., 2000). In so doing internet alters distribution structures, creating new intermediaries and channels or evading these altogether; reintermediation or disintermediation (Chaffey, 2002; O'Connor, 1999; Law et al. , 2004; Wynne et al. , 2001). The benefits of the latter include reduced costs in selling services through middlemen, allowing firms to regain control over price and inventory (Chaffey, 2002). Such benefits can be passed directly to consumers by price reductions and aid in raising potential loyalty (Chaffey, 2002). While firms can capitalize on this tactic, and impact intermediary practices, profit is in some cases less apparent; and so the role of travel retailers is far from erasable (Chaffey, 2002; O'Connor, 1999; Law et al. , 2004; Wynne et al. , 2001). Indeed some consumers require support in selecting services and products thus creating, or reintroducing, web-intermediaries with new value-added web services (Chaffey, 2002; O'Connor, 1999; La et al, 2002; May, 2000). This has produced many web-based firms specialised in selling airline seats and hotel rooms; offering choice, convenience, and value to consumers and increasing distribution for travel firms (La et al, 2002). As per Tapscott et al. (2000) shifting distribution trends, tied with the parameters of control and value, define five key players; subsequently adapted to the travel and tourism industry by Paraskevas (2005). (Consult Appendix 3). Principals include any tourism firm with products to sell such as airlines, hotels, and attractions; for the purpose of converting travel into desirable prices for consumers (Middleton et al, 2001; Paraskevas, 2005). Solely focused on individual capabilities and market intelligence, these players jointly discover desired prices with consumers, who further benefit with integrated value (Paraskevas, 2005; Tapscott et al., 2000). Aggregators select, price, organize and convenience delivery (part or all the way) of services offered by various Principals into optimal travel packages; targeted to meet the needs of the average consumers within specific market segments (Paraskevas, 2005; Tapscott et al., 2000). Despite the variety offered by packages, consumer involvement and value integration, is relatively low (Paraskevas, 2005; Tapscott et al., 2000).
Conversely, Integrators structure and direct a network of Principals to design and deliver packages that meet specific, individual, consumer needs; with the purpose of involving consumers as value drivers, who are charged according to the levels and amount of service required (Paraskevas, 2005; Tapscott et al., 2000).
Alliances are collaborative groups of participants seeking to creatively contribute towards a shared goal; these are often governed by rules and standards relating to matters of interaction, behaviour, and determination of value and prices (Paraskevas, 2005; Tapscott et al., 2000). Yet while consumers of products can be involved in value integration by way of contributory participation, this is not viable in services owing to the inseparable nature of the experience where consumers purchase and use the final experience; they are buyers, not contributors (Paraskevas, 2005; Tapscott et al., 2000).
Infomediaries are the proverbial mediators which facilitate the distributive exchange and delivery of information, goods, and services; thus servicing both the providers and consumers of service (Paraskevas, 2005; Tapscott et al., 2000). Such networks are high and low relative to control and involvement; while they offer valuable information, this remains unforeseeable and uncontrollable (Paraskevas, 2005; Tapscott et al., 2000).
The Internet has radically altered distribution by way of reach, direct or indirect, and rich information available; yet this implicates pricing and branding strategies (Bowie et al. , 2005; Porter, 2001). The Web 's borderless nature has widened geographic competition and complicated differentiation among firms; and so competition shifts toward price (Porter, 2001). Thus the affects of Price Transparency and Brand Dilution greatly impact Principals using diverse Web channels in reaching consumers (Bowie et al. , 2005). As the Merchant Model shows (Consult Appendix 4), Principals efficiently market via the Web directly to consumers with minimal brand dilution; yet extending brand reach via other web-players reduces the control of price and consumer brand awareness (Bowie et al. , 2005). In brief, more distant and shifting brand extensions, bear more brand dilution; tied with increased consumer bargaining power via comparative pricing, and reduced cost control by channel conflict (Bowie et al., 2005; Porter, 2001).
With the purpose to investigate the topic areas discussed thus far, the assignment dismantles a travel package offered by an Aggregator and evaluates similarities and differences as per the Principals involved, and a chosen Integrator. While a level of subjectivity will be involved in this evaluation, the aim will be to keep this to a minimum.
Whether purchasing a product or service, decisions often depend upon a person 's demographics and psychographics (Adcock et al. , 2001). In this case the customer profile resembles Scuba Divers; well-educated, young, single, financially secure, mostly male (Tabata, 1992). The chosen consumer is a 24 year old, single, Caucasian male, named Andres; a recent Masters graduate with a higher level of education. Raised by a collective and supportive family, Andres' financially secure parents are paying for his final self-discovery as a graduation gift before he enters the workforce; offering their full, annual, budgetary support of   34-  37 a year. For 'hardcore' divers like Andres, solitary travel is tied with searching for new thrills and spending more money to pursue a diving experience; leading to search for challenging dive experiences and 'drawing power of exotic or interesting flora or fauna' (Jennings, 2003, p.142).
The package offered by Unreal Dive (Aggregator), is an 11 day trip starting in Cape Town, South Africa, known for cage-diving with Great White Sharks. Priced at   2,066 per person, (Consult Appendix 5 - Package) the trip adds in all specified meals, accommodations, ground transportation, and Diver Insurance; yet excludes all flights, alcoholic drinks, and unspecified meals. The package 's booking nature, provides a choice of dates; yet June-November are ideal for shark sightings; so the choice is 1 st - 12 th September. As per the itinerary, the initial 4 days in Cape Town not only include cage-dives, but a dive in Two Oceans Aquarium, and tours of local attractions. Day 5 entails a stopover at a winery, with lunch and wine tasting, before continuing by private bus to Hermanus, 2 hours away. The next 2 days are intensive dives in Shark Alley where ample sharks can be seen. On the afternoon of day 7, guests are taken to a hotel of their choice in Cape Town; before booking a flight on their own to Krueger National Park; an add-on 4 day trip including accommodations, specified meals, safaris and road transport to and from the airport; without the independent flight back to Cape Town.
The AID-10Framework (consult Appendix 6) lists ten questions for evaluating a web site, subsequently discussed for selected services related to the above mentioned package. Thus the attempt to maintain similar, if not equal, services across distribution channels is needed. Yet while every attempt was made to maintain this criterion, the niche product, and unavailability of a few services through some channels, required a degree of modification; further discussed later in this assignment. While the following evaluations may hold a level of subjectivity, the attempt is made to objectively justify the scoring of each question (consult Appendix 7). Websites including NetMechainic and Webxact were used to evaluate the technical and accessibility issues mentioned earlier.
Access is possible by related URL or top 10 results of Google keyword searches; also, download time for average web connections is quite fast at 24 seconds. Browsing reveals large amounts of rich, relevant, information on cage-diving travel packages in South Africa; yet the only visible date, September 2003, raises questions on prices and itineraries changes. Some biased phrases, albeit intriguing, may reduce content credibility and objectivity; yet while UnrealDive assumes authorship, the disclaimer (Appendix 8) states no warranty is provided on contents. Basic use of graphics is seen with soft colours and irregular highlights to attract attention. Images are ample and rich in aesthetic worth, yet mostly small and can slow download time. The few videos available can only be seen by members, reducing site enjoyment. Even so, adequate use of grids, minimizes 'rectanglitis', and minimal scrolling makes for better browsing; yet little 'white space' and packed line width complicates reading. Average Accessibility conformance relates to an overemphasis on coloured, as well as small, font and images; affecting the visually impaired. While small, the Navigation bar layout eases usage and leads to various internal links, with some external, and few bad links; this is critical given the lack of search features. Limited value adding features include user comments, news letters, and the Shark-o-meter; all of which in English, possibly reducing personalization; currently done with cookies and user-registration. Online transactions require bookings which may delay transactions; yet the niche market and weather dependent activities may justify this absence, whereas lack of basic security measures is questionable.
Users unaware of the site 's URL can easily access the site with Google 's top 10 search results, and with a download time of 19 seconds this is quickly achievable. Even if basic, the quality of site contents is quite rich; ranging from shark information, the ambience in which the dives take place, and the services provided by the Principal. Yet the issue of updated information and prices is questionable, with 2004 being the most recent date available. Some bias is also evident with such words as 'legendary' and the bold claim 'an experience you 'll never forget'; yet this may serve as promotional tactic posted by the authors of the site, Mammoth Solutions. Graphics are provided by way of rich images but they can only be viewed in small, built-in, windows; yet a virtual tour of a shark cage can compensate for this and increase a level of added value to users, which are otherwise quite basic. Even with soft colours and different font families, lack of weight and small size complicates reading; and despite average grid and web pages, tied to reduce scrolling, there is little difference in presentation or compact line width. The site shows average accessibility, with most warnings and errors linked to the site 's use of images and colours to convey information; an area which may be improved for visually impaired users. Despite small menu size, navigation is simple, with internal links unaffected by bad links and connections to external sites, such as search engines, and a sitemap can improve search ability. Other than a FAQ page, and invitation to make bookings for more information or reservations, there is little evidence of personalization or online transactions; which are questionable due to a lack of basic security measures.
Similar to the latter, easier access is provided by Google 's top 10 search results, in place of a complex URL; either way download time is fast at 11 seconds. The rich and relevant content pertain to a similar experience as the latter, yet offer extensive rates to choose from; and encouragingly, such prices are presumably recent given the last update is 2005. Bias is also present, yet in such cases as relating to the boat and cages, the site attempts to justify this via performance figures. Site graphics include animations and images depicting sharks in action to attract attention, yet these may distract users and are of mediocre quality. Colours effectively contrast the different families of font, yet web links may be harder to see once clicked, with the color and font dissolving into the background; Even so the 'blue' space in this case leaves room for text to breathe and adequate line width, further supported with an organized use of grids and minimal scrolling. While adequately meeting Accessibility, the site requires to further support images used to convey information, for example boat interior, with captions. The sites internal links lead to respective pages without any bad links, which reduce scrolling and may ease navigation; yet a lack of external links may be seen as an attempt to restrain users from searching further. Indeed this leads to the criticism for a lack of tools to aid search capability. Similarly the site offers little in the way of value adding features, other than a price converter available for users to calculate future, foreign, payments. The site makes hardly any use of personalization however, and given the amount of information it is surprising that no secondary language option is provided. Finally, as in the case of the latter principal, the site requires a booking for reservations and so lacks a true online transaction and little evidence to suggest security and privacy measures.
Even with average download time of 30 seconds, the site is not easy to access without using the hotel name in a search engines; thus an appropriate URL is needed. Yet the rich site content is useful to users, with relevant information on the hotel and neighbouring Cape Town attractions; accessible independently or via guided tours conducted by the hotel, complete with private chauffer. At first glance information seems dated at 2004, yet hotel rates are posted in more recent dates which may ease decision making. With bias kept to a minimum, the site is credible, and willingly offers information on sister sites provided by the site authors; The Last Word resorts. While the images on the site are fairly small, the sites other graphics include various property videos, rich in detail and aesthetic value; yet these may be the cause of slower download time. Colour of both font and site background is soft yet may strain reading, owing to a centred layout which compacts both 'white space' and lined width. While grids are adequately used, the site and linked pages make little change in presentation. Yet this may inversely affect Accessibility, rated as average, owing to the improper sizing of images and font. Even so navigation bars in the top, side, and bottom of the site allow for rapid access to many internal and external links, with minimal obstruction by bad links. Yet, while a site map is included at the end of every page, search capabilities are limited to internal searches. Value adding features are relatively basic and include guest comments, local maps, and a news letter that users must sign up for; which may provide a level of personalization, albeit minimal. Final transactions require a booking which as previously indicated may not be a true online transaction and may delay the process, yet the boutique nature, and small size of the property may justify such a need. Yet the enquiry asks interest of visit which may be seen as invasion of privacy by some users, who may also question a lack of basic security measures.
Similar to the latter, an appropriate URL is required for easy access to the site yet a faster download time of 17 seconds is slightly more encouraging. Even so quality of content is quite basic, offering little in way of information mostly relating to immediate surroundings and local attractions; information concerning rates is also questionable, lacking in both relevant dates and authorship. Content shows bias in some cases and such words as Auberge and Proven  al may mislead users to consider if this is a French or South African website. Images, although fairly elegant, represent the only form of site graphics yet their rather small size may leave little in way of value to site experience. Even with adequate use of soft colours, site layout suffers from rectanglitis; indeed even with links to highlight available services, the facilities web page is one such example. As with the latter principal, a centred layout may compact both 'white space' and line width. Relative to the areas previously mentioned, the site 's average Accessibility warnings relate to areas of misleading use of language and small sized pictures. Site navigation is also average, despite small menu size, with mostly internal links free from bad links; yet offers no search capability features. Similarly, the site makes no use of value adding features or personalization which may deter future users. Once again the small size and boutique nature of the accommodations may require users to make bookings before any online transaction, with little evidence of security measures, or added guidance.
Despite a rapid download time of 11 seconds, this site is not easily accessible without the proper URL; indeed it only appears on page two of Google 's results. Yet site authors, Manits Collection, provide rich and relevant content describing the lodge, its facilities, and up to date rates for 05-06; yet the claims of the lodge exceeding guest expectations may be somewhat biased. Graphics of added richness are available to users including images, animations, and four Virtual Tours; all of which can add to site enjoyment and value adding features. Despite its small size, the darker coloured font adequately contrasts with the background to aid reading; yet line width and white space is often compact which contradicts this affect. The site adequately uses grids however and allows for organized and differentiated presentation; also reducing excess scrolling. Yet despite such efforts, average Accessibility levels indeed relate to issues of size and positioning of text and images; namely thumbnail captions which are hard to distinguish. Despite such issues, the well structured navigation bar, with no dead links, connects users to internal and external sources that may aid search capability; the site map on the bottom of each page is such an example. Excluding virtual tours, the site makes good use of value adding features including local maps, and weddings arrangements; which, together with newsletter registration, are the few attempts to personalize user experience. While the site offers an online transaction link, this can be misleading as it refers users to a booking form, which may delay transactions and does not identify basic security measures. Similar to above mentioned sites, limited capacity and niche services may justify the need for bookings.
While the site 's URL may be somewhat confusing, it is still accessible via Google 's top 10 results and can be rapidly downloaded in 2 seconds. The site contents are rich, straightforward, and relevant to the many aspects of the Airline; with a precise date available in the policy statement, the site ensures a level of updating is used. The objectivity of the authors, may be seen with the public display of financial figures of justify performance. Despite an adequate use of colours the small font size may make reading problematic and apart from a few logos, thumbnails, and seating plan images, the site makes very little use of graphics. Yet site layout is organized with the use of grids in to present information, tied with good use of white space to allow text to breath; in addition the site 's quite small pages reduce excessive scrolling. Despite these efforts, average accessibility is due to some pages not meeting WAI guidelines; also automatic page refreshing may hinder disabled users' grasp of information. Indeed despite general and navigation layout, the site 's navigation bar may overwhelm some users with a range of mostly functional internal and some external links; nevertheless navigation aids include a fixed main bar on top of every page and anchors. The search bar, while basic, offers visitors a fair amount of information on a selection of flights; nonetheless, this is the only search capability feature visibly available. At first glance the site appears to make no use of value adding features, yet they are available in the form of FAQ, the mentioned seating plans, flight delay information, and downloadable screensavers in the 'about SAA' menu. Indeed personalization is presumably of high value to this site, offering two languages, and various options for 'voyagers' or frequent travellers to choose from; that is once users register and via information gathering cookies. Online transactions are indeed presented in true form, with added levels of security and assistance which ease the process for users (consult Appendix 13).
Despite a complex URL, the site can otherwise be accessed, and downloaded in 20 seconds via Google 's top 10 keyword search results. Site content is quite rich and vast in relevant information on South African tourism and site authors, Cybercapetown, also act as aggregators by offering packages; encouragingly rates are presumed to be recent with 2005 being the last known date. Graphics may be seen as average, with images used mostly as thumbnails and added animations, while small, are also evident in the site though they may be distracting. Colour use is quite effective, yet the often brighter background can be too contrastive with softer font colours and families. Site layout, while basic, suffers from rectanglitis and often compacts information with little line width; in addition, despite various links, the site requires excessive scrolling with no use of anchors. Indeed despite the site 's efforts in presenting information, the inadequate sizing, positing, and use of graphics yields an average level of accessibility. Navigation is fairly straightforward and eased from either the main bar at the top of the page or various internal and external links; yet the main bar suffers from bad links, including "Flights "link simply refreshes the page. Nonetheless, the site 's hot-spot maps not only ease navigation, but improve the already present search capabilities; including search bars and sitemap, yet even these are affected by errors. Other than the hot-spot maps, the site provides a five day weather forecast located on the bottom homepage; yet, these appear to be the only visible value adding features. Nonetheless, the site uses gathered user information, via automatic web server detection or submitted by users, to further personalize the online experience; yet policy statement is outdated at 2002 and no further mention of this is made. Even so the final online transactions offer users good levels of guidance and demonstrate a sound level of basic security measures.
As the literature review suggests, the internet has indeed impacted the pricing strategies of both Principals and Intermediaries. An objective of this assignment is examining such affects, and so a package aids in forming similarity levels for such a comparison. Yet the niche nature of the product, tied to some extent with still developing internet technology of South Africa (Wynne et al., 2001) led to further modifications of the channels discussed. Firstly, no Integrators could be found that offered the Principals' service related to cage diving; thus the creation of hybrid of combined price and brand control (Consult Appendix 16). The two cage-diving Principals were thus added to the total price charged by the integrator. The flight to Krueger, while not included in the package, inevitably forms part of the trip; and so this is included in the overall price for all channels (consult Appendix 17). The respective errors mentioned in the Integrator site however made it impossible to book this flight via this channel, yet the assumption was that a South African Airlines flight could be booked through a South African Integrator. Accommodations provided further implications owing to their boutique nature; namely, the integrator did not provide connections with the Auberge Burgundy, a 3 star boutique guesthouse. Thus the most comparable roommates of a 4 star hotel in the neighbouring are, within Hermanus was selected and added to the Integrator total. Even without the inclusion of a flight, a price comparison indicates the aggregator charges a premium for its services; supporting the theory that this is permissible through optimum selection and convenience provided by a package. While price transparency is difficult to measure relative to Principals involved it can be assumed brand dilution is present; as suggested by the analysis, whereby access to the aggregator site is easier than that of the principals, the hotels for example. Price transparency is evident when comparing the Integrator and Principals however. Such is the case with The Bishops' court where the Integrator has lower prices than the actual property; supporting the theory that the consumer is a value driver in the relationship. Again the analysis suggests that through easier access to the Integrator site, the Principal may suffer from brand dilution. In turn the Principals charge a medial overall price which can be justifiable through the nature that they mostly operate in a niche market, be it boutique lodgings or cage diving; supporting the view that the use market intelligence to justify their rates. While it can be argued certain services of the comparison were not identical; this scenario has shown how the internet truly does allow direct marketing and the potential disintermediation of distribution (Wynne et al. 2001).
The extent to which the internet has affected the tourism industry has changed the way in which consumers not only access, but engage in online transactions; increasing the frequency and acceptance of e-commerce (Middleton et al., 2001). While true to most cases, opposing authors argue that despite increasing volume of online travel sales and marketing, some travellers still rely on travel agents in providing the human touch and professional service elements lacking on the Web (Palmer et al. , 1999 cited in Law et al. , 2004). It thus becomes a question of 'the ends justifying the means' in this case the users' experience and how to improve an online presence through this view (Dalgleish, 2000, p.2). Indeed the assignment thus supports the theory that while the internet has become a revolutionary channel of distribution, with the added benefits of richness and reach, simply distributing mass information through this channel may not be sufficient (O'Connor, 1999). As the AID 10 framework suggests, various issues link to such a theory and indicate that for a site to truly be useful it must abide to certain criteria to efficiently deliver this information. As the theory suggests, this is increasingly vital to encourage online purchases by way of not only informative, but additionally secure and privacy sensitive transactions.
As the evaluations have illustrated, various firms have taken to the web as a means to increase global reach, yet they leave room for improvement. Beginning with the aggregator for example, while the site offers access to rich content by way of eased navigation, the lacking search capability may hinder users' further access to onsite and external information. It would thus be recommendable the site consider providing at least a basic form of search engine; in so doing, the company could better interact with its users by way of providing search access for the excluded flight element of the package, and further justify the use of cookies by the site. On this assumption users may become more inclined to book the package, knowing they may concurrently search the web for potential flights to Cape Town, which will be stored for future access.
Ultimately, this site is recommended to incorporate at least basic security measures into the booking form; and while it can be argued that an online bookings are dissimilar to true online transactions, they stills involve users submitting personal information online. By providing added security measures, as per the theory, the company could thus increase trust levels between the user and supplier. Additional changes to improve the value adding features on the website could include the adoption of a virtual tour, such as the one in SharkCageDiving.net. This would further benefit the company in meeting the increased demand for more graphic information; the proverbial a picture is worth a thousand words (O'Connor, 2004).
Indeed one of the more exemplary sites of this assignment, South African Airlines further supports this view. The site is a good example of the proper use of both security measures, and justified privacy intrusion, to develop higher levels of trust with users to encourage online transactions and return visits. Yet despite its efforts to present site content in an organized lay out, the lack of graphics may result in the site appearing less aesthetically pleasing to graphically demanding users. A recommendation would thus be to include a 'welcome' animation of relevant images, such as crew members tending to passengers, in an effort for the website to simulate the human touch and professional service available to consumers.
Research suggests developments of electronic distribution have also resulted in disintermediation to a considerable scale, particularly within the South African tourism industry (Wynne et al. , 2001). Thus, being a relatively new online integrator, presents cybercapetown the opportunity to better reach a global market through its site; yet substantial room for improvement remains. As discussed, to effectively meet the demand for rapid flowing information throughout the tourism industry, requires progress in ICT maintenance (Buhalis, 2003). An immediate recommendation would thus be upgrading maintenance programs and efforts to ensure the smooth operation of the site 's navigation and search bar; unhelpfully affected by errors. This could benefit the company in aiding users to access the extensive amount of information the site offers, and potentially engage in already secure transactions, thus spreading positive word of mouth. Reducing excess scrolling with anchors, in addition to restructuring the layout of the site, would further strengthen the readability and organized appearance of the website. Moreover, it is recommended the site make more use of personalization such as a  'shopping cart' option similar to the one offered by Amazon.com. This could justify the sites invasion of privacy through cookies while further providing users with the incentive to use a site which promises to remember the user upon return.
The Principals in this assignment, as the analysis suggests, have demonstrated that while the internet has provided increased levels of direct marketing for such channels, to an extent more niche and boutique companies have yet to fully employ the usage of electronic distribution. Indeed the Website Evaluation (Appendix 7) indicates these sites are relatively difficult to access via their often complex URL, supporting the theory that they may benefit from outsourcing their site design services to online intermediaries or infomeadiaries (La et al. , 2001). A recommendation of this nature however, has to be carefully considered, owing to the increased risk of brand dilution; assumed to be an already delicate element to this market. To this extent a more plausible recommendation would be to outsource to a specialized integrator, thus benefiting the companies through increased reach while providing those lesser effective sites the opportunity to possibly benefit from outside market intelligence. Such is the case with the Auberge Burgundy, among the weakest of sites, which under this assumption could benefit from outsourcing its site to an internet savvy integrator to effectively improve on the company site. Similar reintermediation would benefit the shark cage diving Principals, which as suggested by the analysis lack the opportunities to be accessed through integrators. Under this assumption, the Principals could thus benefit from increased visits via higher levels of access to the company sites by desired target markets. As with all the latter mentioned Principals a final recommendation, would be to provide basic levels of security and privacy measures. Even with the continued use of bookings such measures could entice users to consider the Principals further when making decisions, and gathering travel information. Additional personalization of site experiences to selected target markets could allow such niche companies to develop stronger levels trust and loyalty. The final issue of accessibility is an area which has affected all websites; indeed the web as a whole. While it may be argued that this particular package requires a certain level of fitness, the use of the internet in accessing information is not limited to able bodied individuals. Thus a final a recommendation is for the selected channels to pursue future goals in meeting the necessary guidelines to enrich the knowledge of all individuals.
Ultimately the implications of the assignment present a considerable modification of the original travel package, and to some extent, may have skewed the overall findings and discussion. While in some cases modifications were inevitable, owing to technical errors of the web, some were more related to the incapability of certain channels to meet more specialized demands; a possible area for improvement for both Principals and Intermediaries. Nonetheless, the assignment demonstrates how the dynamic nature of the tourism industry, tied with distributive capacity of ICT phenomena such as the internet, have established new parameters of modern marketing and pricing strategy (Middleton et al. , 2001). Ultimately, developments in distribution channels provide the travel and tourism industry the means with which to better integrate the value of desired consumers; providing firms the opportunity to better design effective online services, transactions, and security measures to enhance the levels of required trust in exchanging valuable information over the increasingly important world wide web.
