This essay starts off with a brief introduction of cross-cultural behavior in tourism and specifically focuses the discussion on the Chinese tourists in Oxford. This part also identifies the number of Chinese tourist shall increase dramatically. Following is the presentation of a chosen consumer behavior model proposed by Mayo and Jarvis (1981) and theoretical discussion of its factors, especially culture and motivation factors. This model is used in the subsequent analysis of Chinese tourists' consumer behavior with the support of previous literature review and secondary data. Two factors of the model, cultural value and motivation, are analyzed and the implications for Oxford 's Chinese tourism marketing strategies are drawn. The final part concludes that the knowledge of cultural influence on trip characteristics is of great importance to destination managers in Oxford specifically in selecting appropriate marketing strategies for this target market.
The past decades have witnessed a dramatic growth of the international tourism market and many people visit foreign destinations for various purposes. Traveler geographic origin, defined as "the nations where tourists who visit an area are permanently living" has for a long time been the main focus for market segmentation efforts (Flognfeldt, 1999:112). As Reid and Reid (1997) proposed that visitor characteristics and profiles must be found distinguishable by country of origin, so the knowledge of culture 's influence on trip characteristics is of great importance to tourism marketers aiming at satisfying the needs and wants of international tourists.
With one fifth of the worlds' population, China has the greatest number of consumers in the world and has been recognized as the market with the greatest buying potential for the 21 st century. (Wang and Sheldon, 1995) In fact, the World Tourism Organization predicted that China will be the fourth largest outbound-tourist-generating country in the world by 2020 (WTO, 1997). Besides the huge population that China has (1.3 million), there are two other reasons for the predication. First, the increase of the disposable income of Chinese and secondly, the relaxation of outbound travel restrictions by the Chinese government (Wang and Sheldon, 1995). According to statistics of China National Tourism Administration (2004), China has become the biggest Asian nation in terms of outbound travelers, with the total number of outbound Chinese residents surpassing 13 million in the first half of the 2004 (www. Traveldailynews.com, 2005). The increase of outbound tourists indicates China 's rapid economic growth and peoples' desire to see the world. From this point of view, China represents a potential important market for many countries, bearing in mind its population .Therefore it is likely to see the number of cross-cultural Chinese tourists shall increase dramatically in the future. With regard to UK, visits from China have more than doubled in the last five years to over 100,000 with spending rising 60%. The number is expected to increase as UK was officially approved as a destination for Chinese tourists. (www. xinhuanet.com, 2005). It is estimated that by 2010 there could be over 200,00 Chinese visitors in the UK and there is potential for China to be in Britain 's top ten inbound tourism market by 2020 (Oxford July Tourism Newsletter, 2005). Focused on the historical city, Oxford, the understanding of Chinese visitor 's behavioral and its relevance is important to the manager of a tourism organization here.
The influence of culture on travel has been well documented by many scholars. (Armstrong, Mok, Go and Chan, 1997; Pizam, Pine, Mok, and Shin, 1997). These studies reported that people from different culture have different preference and expectations. Reisinger and Turner (2003) also pointed out the national culture of different countries, such as values, norms or rules have a significant impact on tourist 's behavior, experiences and holiday satisfaction. As a consequence, tourists representing different nationalities reveal unique differences in characteristics relating to tourism. One tourism product that satisfy the domestic tourist in a host country might not be regarded as satisfying for international tourists. If the tourism products or services do not adequately satisfy international tourists' needs and fail to address adequately their cultural value, tourism marketers need to adjust their product offerings (Reisinger and Turner, 2003). Therefore understanding the needs and wants of cross-cultural tourists is crucial to tourism manager of a destination.
Moutinho (1987) referred the consumer behavior as "the process of acquiring and organizing information in the direction of a purchase decision and of using and evaluating products and services" (Moutinho,1987: 5). In his theory, the process includes the stage of searching for information, purchasing, utilizing, and disposing of products and services. However, the tourist buying decision presents some unique aspects: the product or service customer brought cannot be measured and touched before the purchase and such purchase is planned through savings over a long period of time (Middleton, 2001). Therefore tourists buying decision is a process of serious and thorough consideration.
Mayo and Jarvis (1981) introduced a model focusing on the individual traveler 's behavior from both a psychological and sociological perspective. In their opinion, the understanding of how individual travelers make decisions requires an "insight "into the psychological factors that influence their choices (Mayo and Jarvis, 1981:19). In the following figure 1, Mayo and Jarvis illustrates that the travel decision-maker, in the center of the diagram, is affected by both internal and social, influences.
The internal psychological factors that influence travel behavior proposed by Mayo and Jarvis (1981) are (1) perception, (2) learning, (3) personality, (4) motives and (5) attitudes. Mayo and Jarvis referred to perception as "the process by which an individual selects, organizes, and interprets information to create a meaningful picture of the world ". Learning is "changes in an individual 's behavior based on his experiences. Personality referes to "the patterns of behavior displayed by an individual, and to the mental structures that relate experience and behavior in an orderly way." Motives are described as "the internal energizing forces that direct a person 's behavior toward the achievement of personal goals. Attitudes consist of "knowledge and positive or negative feelings about an object, an event, or another person" (Mayo and Jarvis, 1981:19).
However, Mayo and Jarvis (1981) also mentioned these psychological factors do n't work independently, travel decisions, thus are very much affected by forces outside the individual, and including the influences of other people .The forces that other people exert are called "social influence" (Mayo and Jarvis,1981:19). As figure 1 shows, these social influences can be grouped into four major areas "(1): role and family influence, (2) reference groups, (3) social classes, and (4) culture and subcultures" (Mayo and Jarvis, 1981:20).
Cultural values are defined as "shared values, beliefs and norms that collectively distinguish a particular group of people from others" (Pizam et al., 1997:131).As discussed above, Mayo and Jarvis (1981) believed the culture in which a person lives has a significant impact on his or her leisure and travel behavior .In their opinion, the culture in which one lives can be viewed as" a large, impersonal reference group" (Mayo and Jarvis, 1981:250). Moreover, they proposed cultures can be classified in national terms, such as American and French Cultures. Reisinger and Turner shared same thought with Mayo and Jarvis .They pointed out the national culture of different countries, such as values, norms or rules have a significant impact on tourist 's behavior, experiences and holiday satisfaction (Reisinger and Turner, 2003). Specifically , the cultural values might have influence on a person 's relations with others, the way he perceive things, the services he want and the way he behaves as a customer . According to the literature reviewed, the following part discusses the cultural attributes of Chinese tourists with possible marketing implications for each attributes in the tourism industry in Oxford.
According to Bond, (1987), most of Chinese culture is shown in the work of Confucius, whose doctrine has developed through a 5000 evolution and is still a basic pillar of Chinese life today (Cited in Reisinger and Turner, 2003). Confucian philosophy, preaching the values of collectivism, personal relationship, harmony, friendship, and the importance of education, still strongly influences the moral code of Chinese society (Moise, 1995). Even Confucianism covers many aspects of Chinese people 's life, the following three main values of Confucianism are discussed .First, and tourism literature consistently reported that Chinese people are more willing to travel in groups rather than individually (Mok and Armstrong, 1995; Wang and Sheldon, 1995). It is logical to relate such behavior of Chinese to their value for group activities. Adler (1991) pointed out that in a collectivist society, people are group oriented and define themselves as members of communities (Cited in Giber and Tsao, 2000). Therefore all activities aiming at Chinese tourists should be group-oriented, including traveling and sightseeing. Destination managers that plan to attract more Chinese tourists to Oxford should design group tours and promote these tours through advertising featuring scenes of group members sharing their traveling experiences. Most importantly, they should avoid separating a group of Chinese tourists, assist them in "doing things together" and show concern to their group-decision .Secondly, Chinese have a strong respect for parents and the elderly. Huyton (1991) noted that one of the aspects of a Confucian value for the Chinese people is filial-piety by giving unquestioning respect to parents and the elderly (Cited in Reisinger and Turner, 2003). A good example to explain this point is they always bring gifts back from foreign places to parents and elderly (Mok and DeFranco, 1999). The study of Mok and Lam indicated that Taiwanese tourists are well known for their excessive shopping behavior (Mok and Lam, 1997). In addition to buying gifts for parents and elderly, Chinese also brought gifts back for their friends or colleagues to strengthen social and family ties. Mok and Lam (1997) attributed Taiwanese fondness of overseas shopping to their culture value of maintaining social relationships .As a result , souvenir shopping by Chinese is a very popular activity in destination. From this point of view, the souvenir shops in Oxford, for example, the one in Oxford Story shall display the goods and products that represent the identity of Oxford to attract Chinese tourist .Such products can not only help them to preserve a wonderful memory of the trip but serves to legitimize and commemorate their visit to Oxford .Accordingly, logo-embossed products linking with their trips, mugs, and t-shirts are favorable items among Chinese tourists. Introduction on special items and recommendation on the choice of goods from shop assistants will be appreciated by Chinese tourists. Over the next 10 years, increasing disposable incomes will mean that Chinese tourists will buy more items during their overseas trips, and that possibly their tastes will be more like the tastes of Taiwan Chinese or Hong Kong tourists. The managers should bear in mind that even Chinese tastes in souvenirs are different , but most of them prefer gold color, which represents status in Chinese traditional culture .Thirdly, Wang and Lau (2001) stressed Chinese cultural values are mostly affected by Confucianism and harmony is regarded as the foundation of Chinese culture. Chinese cultures emphasize self-restraint, avoidance of negative emotions, criticism, negative opinions and complaints. (Reisinger and Turner, 2003). Leung (1991) explained that sometimes in china one answers a negative statement with a "yes" (Cited in Reisinger and Turner, 2003). The value for harmony has profound implication for Chinese consumer behavior which concerns customer satisfaction and complaints. Influenced by these values, Chinese people tend not to complain to service providers directly in order to maintain harmony (Mok and DeFranco, 1999). From the point of view of destination managers, they need to be more sensitive to the customer satisfaction of Chinese visitors and take a more active approach to obtain the feedback from them, such as providing a message book. Chinese are likely to be more discerning consumers as they become wealthier .So service providers will need to be very sensitive to their feedback, and develop new mechanism to get feedback.
In Chinese culture, one 's face could be refer to the prestige one possesses by virtue of social achievement such as wealth, talents and social status (Mok & DeFranco, 1999). AP and Mok (1996) in their study on leisure travel motivations of Hong Kong residents found that prestige is an important reason for traveling abroad (Cited in Mok & DeFranco, 1999). So some Chinese regarded overseas traveling as a prestigious product. From this point of view , Chinese travelers are likely to be more brand conscious than Westerners .The symbolic values of products and services are as important to Chinese tourists as their functional values ( Mok & DeFranco,1999). Therefore the tourism products or services marketed as status symbols or have "face enhancing "qualities will appeal to Chinese tourists. Clarke (2000) pointed out that a strong brand is a great marketing advantage to a tourism destination .For Chinese visitor, the brand "Oxford" is regarded not only as a historic city but also as a world famous University. Branding marketing is a key to successful marketing in Oxford as it helps the destination manager to capture Chinese tourists. The most successful destination have achieved its brand to the extend where the mention of their name evokes the mental images and perceived experiences (Crocket and Wood, 1999). In terms of Oxford, it should build itself to be a cultural and historical destination in Chinese minds .Those Chinese tourists traveling here will help to promote the Oxford to their friends or relatives if they recognized the brand. Meanwhile, the destination mangers can join some tourism festivals or exhibitions to help long-time brand-building in mainland China. Apart from what has been discussed above, Chinese peoples' fondness of taking photographs is another explanation of their "face" value. According to the study conducted by Wang and Lau (2001), photograph was one of important activity of Hongkong Chinese tourists traveling overseas. Voase (1995) stated travelers usually use photograph to "document" a trip, especially famous attractions (Cited in Wang and Lau, 2001). However, this is not the sole explanation for Chinese people 's fondness of taking photography .They show phtographys to friends and relatives to satisfy their needs for esteem. .As Mayo and Jarvis (1981) states that travel, in such cases, becomes a symbol of success and achievement. The destination manager in Oxford need to bear this in mind and leave enough time for Chinese tourists to take photography when making tour arrangements for them .Perhaps they can also prepare "photo sites" where Chinese tourists can take photos that look really good without disturbing the operation of the city.
Why do people travel? This is not a simple question. Mayo and Jarvis (1981) believed the answers to the question depend on the individual and his cultural background .According to Mayo and Jarvis' theory, motivation is thought to be the "ultimate driving force that governing travel behavior "(Mayo and Jarvis, 1981:146).
A review of the motivation literature identified a number of factors that influence travel decisions.'Escape from the everyday environment', 'novelty', 'cultural experience',  'social interaction', and 'prestige ' motivation factors ( Kim and Prideaux, 2005:349) .However, the more important factors for traveling to foreign countries were "cultural experience" and "novelty seeking " (Kim & Prideaux, 2005:349 ) . Mayo and Jarvis (1981) even suggested the cultural motivations include the desire for knowledge of other countries - their music, art, folklore, dances, paintings and religion. The study conducted by Wang and Lau (2001) proved Hongkong Chinese lay emphasis on the novelty and authenticity of attractions .They have strong desire to taste local food and experience overseas environment and culture . It is clear that experiencing a different culture is a very important reason for Chinese to go on trips to foreign countries. In addition to that , Influenced by Confucian philosophy, Chinese have a tradition of valuing knowledge and culture (Bond and Hwang, 1987, Cited in Wong and Chung, 2003). As a famous historic city, the tradition and culture of Oxford should be an important addition to the tourist product and visitors' experiences of this area. The great appeal of Oxford to Chinese visitors is its history and culture .The university of Oxford, with its rich heritage of medieval buildings and the high reputation in the world, is a great appeal to Chinese tourists . The historic build environment, together with the traditions of university and colleges, creates an attractive physical environment and atmosphere. Tourism organization in Oxford can organize the educational college-visiting tours to enhance Chinese visitor 's experience in the internationally renowned university. In addition to that, the themed presentation of Oxford Story offer Chinese tourists an opportunity to embark on the exciting "dark journey" which brings them to explore the historical world of the University and the city .Such tourist attractions with cultural theme or purpose are very popular among Chinese tourists .With regard to the museums in Oxford (such as Pitt-Rivers and Ashmolean), when marketing to Chinese tourists in pursuit of new experience and knowledge in overseas travel , they should focus on the culture and knowledge orientation of the trip .Meanwhile , in the light of Chinese tourists' demand for novelty and authenticity of attractions, cultural event with local residents will need to organized to provide them to observe and experience local culture and attractions. Alternatively, there will also be need for arranging specialist destination for Chinese tourist-----restaurants, exhibitions of links between Oxford and China.
With one-fifth of population in the world, China is regarded as the market with biggest buying potential in the 21 st Century. Moreover, there are two essential factors contributing to the continuing increase of China 's outbound tourism: adequate income to be able to travel and official permission to do so .So it is reasonable to make the predication that Chinese overseas visitors are likely to increase in the future. As the famous historic city in UK, inevitably Oxford will be affected by this trend Therefore the growth of Chinese outbound tourism shall sparkle considerable interests of travel marketers into the unique behavior of Chinese consumers. As discussed above on the essay, the successful international marketing depends upon the understanding of the cultural backgrounds of various groups of international tourists. Therefore the understanding of the needs and wants of Chinese visitors is paramount to the Oxford destination managers aiming at this market share. Only in this way can the destination managers in Oxford joint together to make Oxford a preferred destination that offer high value, high satisfaction products to Chinese travelers .
