The importance of nutrition for overall health is well known by both professionals and patients, and yet statistics and ward experiences demonstrate that nutrition is a component of patient care that is all too often overlooked, or at best dealt with when problems arise rather than managed preventatively by staff. This essay will endeavour to posit reasons for this, and to discuss in greater detail the nutritional needs of the hospital inpatient and the negative affects of malnutrition. The skills, knowledge, attitudes, strategies and assessment tools the professional practitioner might employ to ensure that the patient 's nutritional needs are identified and catered for will then be considered.
There are varying statistics for the prevalence of malnutrition amongst hospital inpatients, although the numbers are uniformly high: around 40 to 50 percent (Holmes 2003, Whitney and Heitkemper 1999), with malnutrition being defined as "any condition in which deficiency, excess or imbalance of energy, protein or other nutrients adversely affects body function and/or clinical outcome" (RCP 2002, cited in Holmes 2003:45).
The affects of nutrition on rates of healing and length of hospital stay are well documented. Evidence shows that wound healing is accelerated by nutritional repletion and delayed by malnutrition, even where we are unsure of the physiological reasons why in the case of certain nutrient substrates (Whitney and Heitkemper, 1999). The body 's response to physiological trauma is a complex one, but even at a basic level it is obvious that the healing process makes additional energy demands which will need to be nutritionally met in order for the body 's systems to respond and function at the optimum level.
Further evidence for the influence of nutrition on patient recovery can be seen in a recent study conducted by Pichard et al (2004) monitoring a total of 995 hospital patients from admission to discharge. The study 's findings demonstrate a clear correlation between poor nutritional status (as measured via the depletion of lean or fat-free body mass on admission) and increased length of hospital stay.
The reasons for the prevalence of malnutrition amongst inpatients are manifold but often surprisingly basic. Despite numerous initiatives to improve hospital catering in terms of both food and service (DH 2005), hospital food continues to be a common cause for patient complaints, whether it be taste, temperature, menu choices, timing, availability or portion sizes that are objected to. Experience in a ward setting has highlighted staff frustration and patient dissatisfaction at 'hot' meals being served lukewarm or cold, patients' menu selections not being met, ice cream delivered melted and jellies not set, inappropriate portion sizes, and meals being whisked away again untouched before a member of nursing staff has been able to attend to assist the patient in eating them.
In addition to these, further simple factors impede patient nutrition for which nursing staff themselves may be deemed more culpable. Food is frequently left out of reach, patients who are unable to feed themselves unaided are not given assistance, and other nursing tasks interrupt or delay mealtimes. An overall lack of time and resources, along with conflicting demands, combine to make patient mealtimes stressful periods of the day for both patients and staff. It is little wonder that these collective factors can quell the appetite of a patient whose desire to eat is already impaired by the physiological and psychological effects of illness, trauma and medication, not to mention the radical change to personal routine that any period of hospital stay engenders.
In order to begin to improve the situation it is vital that the professional practitioner have knowledge of why nutrition is important, and what constitutes a balanced and nutritious diet. It may also be necessary for the practitioner to be aware of nutritional needs particular to certain patient groups and clinical specialities in order to be able to inform patient choices and provide nutritional repletion where it may be beneficial (such as in wound healing as discussed above). Further to this the practitioner must be quick to recognise malnutrition and its stages, and understand its far-reaching implications for the patient.
Many skills come into play in the promotion of good nutrition, but communication is probably the most important. Many barriers to adequate nutrition can be overcome merely by listening to patients and finding out why they are not eating enough or the right things. The practitioner needs to become a resourceful and subtle negotiator when it comes to encouraging patients to eat, treating each patient as an individual and adopting different strategies to suit their needs.
Communication also plays a major function in involving family members and other staff in the promotion of good nutrition. The provision of food and of nutritional education incorporates a large variety of staff members, from catering managers, serving staff and housekeepers to dieticians and specialist nurses (Mason and Brady, 2003). Good interdisciplinary teamwork is therefore crucial if lasting improvements are to be made.
Other skills also have a bearing on nutrition, notably in the use of certain clinical tools to assess and document a patient 's nutritional status and food intake. Risk assessment charts are particularly crucial in pre-empting malnutrition, and these can be carried out using tried and tested frameworks such as the MUST (Malnutririon Universal Screening Tool) assessment (Godfrey, 2004), and BMI (Body Mass Index) scoring. These in turn can prompt the monitoring of daily intake where required using food record charts (Freeman, 2002). As with many other core nursing skills, benchmarking is also a positive step towards best practice (Ellis 2002, Mason and Brady, 2003). The patient themselves should be involved in the planning and documentation process at every stage where possible (Freeman 2002).
To summarize the above, malnutrition is a widespread problem in hospitals, with a significant effect on healing and recovery rates and length of hospital stay. In order to improve nutrition in hospitals the professional practitioner must have knowledge of the importance and composition of a nutritious diet, adopt an attitude of accountability and cooperation, and have skills in communication and the use of pre-established screening tools.
Nutrition should be prioritised in accordance with its importance for the overall health and wellbeing of the patient, and not superseded by less fundamental tasks or delegated to untrained staff who might lack the skills, knowledge and attitude to achieve the best results.
