I visited Dudley Zoo on 27 th October 2005 to observe an all-female group of seven chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes). I chose chimpanzees as I plan to study this species for a longer research project in the future. I observed the activity budget of an eight year old adolescent exhibiting full tumescence. She is one of two adolescents in the group, which is also home to her mother. I wanted to assess the amount of activity, analyse the types of activity, the substrate where activity took place, whether the presence of visitors would increase the amount of activity and whether the activity was social or self-directed.
It was a clear day, and the chimpanzees had access to both an indoor and sizeable outdoor enclosure. After an hour of unrecorded observations, I noticed that the outdoor space was rarely utilised, so I decided to watch the chimpanzees in their indoor enclosure.
The enclosure is a long way from the zoo entrance in the opposite direction to the other exhibits. I personally found it to be a confusing layout and poor signing. There were not a large number of visitors to the indoor chimpanzee enclosure in the time I was there (a total of four hours). I noted the presence of visitors as I was making observations.
I spoke to the primary chimpanzee caregiver for anecdotal information and to learn the facial and bodily differences needed to tell the individuals apart. I identified one adolescent, and also learned the identifying features of her mother.
I utilised an instantaneous point sampling method on the focal animal. At every one minute interval for 45 minutes I noted behaviour according to an ethogram refined from Bettinger (2002), Kingal. (1980), McLennan (2003), McQuitty (1970) and Nishidaal. (1999) (see Appendix 1 for ethogram). I added further details on behaviours in an 'other' category, along with any external factors such as the presence of a keeper or visitors. Altmann (1974, p213) suggests that focal animal sampling may exclude acts directed at the individual by others, so I also include the presence and interactions of others in the 'other' column.
I was particularly interested in the activity of the focal animal. Out of 45 minutes of observations I found that she was active for 56% of the time (25 minutes), inactive for 29% (13 minutes) and not visible for 16% of the time (7 minutes). It may be estimated that during the period she was not visible she was actually active outside, but this cannot be guaranteed so the categories were kept separate. If the 'not visible' minutes are added to the activity minutes, the chimpanzee would have been active for 72% of the time.
There were five substrates and height levels available to the chimpanzee inside the enclosure. She was observed on the ground for only one minute out of the 45 minute session and spent most of her time on a suspended branch or lying on a ceiling hose hanging from the ceiling. If the transition between substrates involved using the ground, it would only be noted if it occurred precisely at the one minute interval. It could also be estimated that if the chimpanzee was out of sight outside, she was on the ground, but this could not be proven.
I did not observe any social behaviour involving the focal animal. All the activity was self-directed, for example self-grooming or playing with a branch. When her mother approached and sat next to her she ignored her and continued eating. She then moved away, only for her mother to follow her and sit next to her again for a further five minutes. While this was not an activity marked on the ethogram, it is a form of communication and social response. Eating was the predominant activity. During the observation the only food items eaten were two leafy branches, one of which was already inside the enclosure, and the other which was obtained by the focal animal from outside. The walking and running behaviours were observed while the chimpanzee was moving from one part of the enclosure to another, so this behaviour was purposeful.
I wanted to assess whether the presence of visitors, which in all parties included children, had any impact on whether the chimpanzee was active or inactive. I began with a null hypothesis that the presence of visitors (excluding keepers) would not produce increased activity. H: Activity in the presence of visitors = activity without the presence of visitors. 51% of the time was spent engaged in activity without the presence of visitors, with only 4% of activity taking place with people present. The combination of having visitors along with activity was actually the least seen association. A non-parametric chi-square analysis found no significant relationship between the presence of visitors and the amount of activity of the focal chimpanzee, therefore the null hypothesis stands (See Appendix 4 for chi-square calculation). However, the test is not conclusive, as "Many statisticians recommend a certain minimum expected frequency (fe) per cell. A very conservative rule of thumb is that fe must always be equal to or greater than 5" (Kranzler and Moursund, 1995, p 103).
I think the one-minute intervals were rather too long, as I was aware of missing some changes in state and the transition from one activity to another or from one location to another.
Indeed, Martin and Bateson (1993, p90) suggest "The shorter the sample interval, the more accurate instantaneous sampling is at estimating duration and the more closely it resembles continuous recording". In the future I would use intervals of 30 seconds.
The chimpanzee was not visible for a significantly high proportion of the time (seven minutes / 16%). The chimp could be presumed to be active whilst outside, because in one case she came back with a branch, and in the other case went to receive a drink of water. This assumption has been incorporated into other studies of chimpanzees in captivity (McLennan, 2003), but I decided not to convert 'not visible' to 'activity' in the statistical analysis of states. I concur with Altmann (1974, p 244) that for studies where time is not an important variable it may not be necessary to record the amount of time out of sight, but as my observations focused on amounts of time, it was important to include the 'not visible' category.
Another problem I encountered was having some discrepancies with percentage calculations between a calculator and the computer, as the computer automatically rounded up calculations.
No social interaction occurred in this period of observations. However, during unrecorded observations and using a continuous sampling method I did see social interactions, including social playing and mutual grooming. It is regrettable that this did not appear in my observations, as it gives an imbalanced impression of the sociability of the animal. I acknowledge that a 45 minute observation time is too short to give an accurate representation, and it is not possible to make statistically valid interpretations of data. In the future I would try to observe for a longer total period.
