The rapid development of media technologies in recent years has produced dramatic changes in Europe Media Industry. They are featured as not only broadening information channels, but also changing the structure of the European media industry. Combining merger and acquisition strategies with internationalisation and diversification, the major media players now operate at the European level and define their policies accordingly. Media program 's contents are therefore dominated by major players from a few countries. These changes are producing effects to social idea, social economy, life style and behaviours etc. and they have created an increasing demand of doing research about development of media industry and its impact to European society.
Journal of European Media and Communications Studies, which will be launched in Oct 2006, is catering for this need and will serve as a forum for specialists to publicize research fruits and exchange ideas. Articles on this journal will assess existing media structures and practices, European media concentration, European media and consumer culture, the role of media in democratic governance and European justice, propaganda, media reception and cultural practice, commercialization of news, European Media industry 's structure and future trends, new media technologies, media regulations, regional media, alternative media, and other timely issues.
Publicizing information shortly to European countries and non-European countries;.
Making this journal highly recognised by core market - Europe in the first two years;.
Drawing attentions from non-European countries as well;.
Arranging promotions in 2006 and 2007.
Achieving 500 copies of subscription for 2007 and 2008 respectively.
Due to the feature of subscription, 2 time lines need to be defined. One is for promoting this journal, i.e. 2006 and 2007. The other is for subscriptions to issues, i.e. 2007 and 2008.
In Europe there are about 45 countries using around 29 official languages. However, European Union now dominates this continent and aims at European Integration which brought about some anxieties, e.g. how to keep the language and culture identified and economic and politic system independent.
The enlargement of the European Community and further economic integration in EU, have created a 300 million pan-European mass media consumer market more open to international competition and commercial forces at the expense of protected national broadcasters.
The application of new media technologies has brought about great changes characterized by concentration of capital and internationalization of market; diversity of information channels; technological convergence etc. A host of questions, and even controversy, have surrounded these changes ranging from the economic (both macro and micro), to the social (exclusion, cohesion), the socio-economic (the digital divide), the political (e-democracy), the cultural and beyond and created interests regarding their actual and potential impact.
Broad attention is absorbed from academic circles and policy-makers. 5-year study programme: "Changing Media - Changing Europe" by ESF (European Science Foundation), "Guide to Measuring the Information Society" by OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development) and "i2010" (European Information society in 2010) etc are the results of these consideration and discussion.
Under this situation, it is necessary to supply a forum for specialists to make a full discussion and communication. Meanwhile, it is necessary to open a window for policymaker and media players to learn information from academic studies. So there is a marketing gap for this journal.
Intentionally extending its list on media and communication. 2005 's catalogue shows that Taylor has increased 7 journals on communication.
Launching this journal in order to fill in the vacancy without a journal on European Media and Communication.
Having a long history of publication with the world famed academic brand on social science and humanities.
Having a good performance in company operation.
Having a great specialist team. Over 1300 specialists from 36 countries work for editorial board of communication-related journals. Among them 73 editors are from 17 European countries.
Having a good customer basis. 2004 T&F Informa Annual Report shows that subscriptions' contribution to annual revenue is up to 43%. The revenue from Europe market is up to 50% (United Kingdom -19%, West Europe - 31%).
Having priority to grasp the first-hand materials about technology trends and specialists due to acquisition with Informa Telecoms & Media which is the world 's largest telecoms event organizer.
An increasing demand on exchanging academic ideas.
An increasing demand on knowing the trends of change in Media Industry and its impact.
Europe has 45 countries in which 29 official languages are used. English language makes it vulnerable.
The original submission possibly goes to various outlets. Because this subject is related to all aspects, i.e. from technology to policy to investment, from academic research to social activities. Moreover, communication-related associations are very active and have their own websites or publications. How to guarantee this journal can collect high quality original submissions became significant.
Information from websites, Ulrich International Journal online catalogue and Web of Science show that the publications on Media and communication are mainly published by Taylor and Sage. Other major academic publishers, e.g. Elsevier, Springer and Wiley, only publish a very small quantity of relevant books. They have n't book / journal list under this subject. Palgrave Macmillan has quite a lot of books on relevant topic but they focus on relationship between cultural theory, politics etc. and media. So they can hardly create a competition to Taylor.
Sage has 488 titles book and 26 journals list on Communication and Media. One journal is specific to the European Communication. Somehow, it is a competitor of Taylor and Francis in this field. However, Sage ca n't compete with Taylor and Francis on company scale, publishing history, professional experience and specialist team.
In general, Taylor and Francis takes a good position in this field.
This analysis is based on the marketing objective which will focus on the European market within the first 2 years.
According to research of target institutional subscribers and their size in Europe, Figure 1 is applied to give a direct expression of market structure of this journal.
European Universities and university level institutions will be the major subscribers. Online information shows that media and communication related courses are very popular in Europe. Figure 2 shows the relevant details in UK. It refers that there is a very good need to relevant journals.
European higher Education is well developed. Official statistics e.g. Eurostat, supply detailed data of university student numbers. But they are n't applied to support this marketing plan. This is taking into account of the feature of subscriptions to academic journals, i.e. the main subscribers are institutions. Figure 3 applied to show that there is a big basis of higher educational institutions and potential market in Europe.
In order to support this campaign and verify market potentiality of European universities, here supplies official statistics of universities in UK, Germany and France as a further supportive materials.
Over 300 university institutions in the above 3 European countries, plus universities in Spain, Italy, Sweden, Finland, Netherlands, Switzerland, Norway, Austria, Russia etc, there is a market potentiality of 500 university subscribers.
European National academic institutions will be important contributors and subscribers of this journal. European Science Foundation has 77 national academic institutions registered from 30 main European countries. 48 of them with programmes on Humanities and Social Science have been undertaking the relevant studies. They will be the target customers.
Top 10 European media enterprises can be taken as potential subscribers.
European Media Industry in Europe is well developed. Figure 5 shows the Breakdown of top 50 media companies in Europ.
Top 10 leading media companies account for a revenue ranged from $7.9 billion to $2.4 billion. They are dominated in Europe, even non-Europe market. It is necessary for them to know more about scholars' attention to media industry. So they may be potential customers.
Name list of Top 10: Bertelsmann, Havas, ARD, Reed-Elsevier, BBC, Fininvest Matra, Hachette, RAI, CLT and Axel Springer 2004 Annual report shows that T&F Informa has a good market share in North America which contributes to its revenue about 33% while the rest of the world outside Europe is 17%.
North America is active at academic research of media and communication and is the base of some important academic associations.
So there is possibility to market this journal outside Europe.
Sum up the above analysis, a conclusion can be made that there is a tangible and accessible market for this journal within and outside Europe.
Marketing strategy for this campaign can be abbreviated as a six-word slogan:
Taylor 's existing communication journals have achieved good circulations whose subscribers will be the core target customers.
Besides, Taylor has great subscriptions to other Humanities and Social Science journals. Deploying the current subscribers could bring about a breakthrough of marketing this journal. In the first year marketing will focus on European market but give consideration to non-European market; in the second year marketing will put more efforts to non-European market.
This journal will be developed into the primer source of European media and communication studies. Its editorial board will consist of specialists from the relevant fields. The quality and pertinence will be guaranteed.
Research shows that Taylor 's communication journals are priced at the medium to low level.
Pricing this journal at the same level as other regional communication journals.
Price options available for Print + online access, Online only and individual in order to meet various demands. 20% special offer to existing communication journal 's subscribers who submit orders before 31 st Aug 2006.
Within the first two years the price wo n't change in order to stabilise subscriptions and absorb new subscriptions.
Sending press release and order form together with current subscriptions by email or by post. Sample issues will be delivered as requested.
Publishing new journal 's information on all communication-related journals.
Delivering information through editors. Over 1300 editors work for communication-related journals. They are from key institutions and can take information to the end-users at the first time.
Doing promotion on Taylor 's website. Items"New Journal", "Press Release" and "Communication Arena" () can be used to deliver information of this new journal. There through editors' special recommendation and link service the information can be easily distributed.
Opening free online access to subscribers and guests in order to make this journal to be recognised well in 2007.
Doing promotion through academic associations. Taylor publishes lots of communication-related journals on behalf of academic associations, e.g. AMIC, NCA, ECA, WSCA etc. National Communication Association (NCA), has 7700 memberships from 20 countries. Marketing this journal through relevant conventions and website will be an economical, effective and mutually beneficial way.
Direct sale will be the major way of marketing this journal and collecting orders. Taylor 's in house mailing list will be the first choice. Other relevant lists can be taken as a supplement.
Professional agents will be used for areas where Taylor 's sales force ca n't cover. Swets will be a candidate agent because it owns offices in 12 European Countries and can link between 60,000 providers and 65,000 librarians, purchasers & end users.
Replacing missing issues at the first time of receiving claiming.
Setting up online access as soon as fulfilment of subscription order.
Sending questionnaires to subscribers against schedule and processing the feedback in time "Journal Publishing" shows that the costs of paper, printing and binding for a journal usually account for rather less than 35% of the subscription price.
This marketing plan is based on economical and effective operation. Since lots of existing resources can be used without extra charges, this budget is made only for the following expenses:
This marketing plan is based on the overall marketing research and consulting with Editorial Dept, Sales Dept. Subscription Dept, Customer Service Centre and Distribution Centre etc. Various processes should be controlled by the relevant developments. The responsibilities are allocated as follows:
Marketing Dept: overall supervision of this plan 's implementation and monitoring.
Editorial Dept: compiling blurb, special recommendation for "Commendation Arena" and process the feedback about the contents of this journal.
Sales Dept: overall promotions, including arrangement of distributing information by email, post and website, contacting liaisons of associations and overseas representatives.
Subscription Dept: fulfilment of subscription orders and monitoring feedbacks from customers.
Customer Service: handling various queries and processing claims and monitoring feedbacks.
Distribution Centre: delivering press release, order forms and sample issues with shipments of current subscriptions.
In order to guarantee this plan can be well implemented, all above mentioned departments, especially those involved in timely tasks, should have its own schedules in line with this plan. Relevant departments will have meetings together and analyse the process of promotion, the sources of subscription order and feedback about the service and journal 's quality.
Any adjustment for a period plan, when it is necessary, will be made after discussion.
