Through "The Magic Box", Kit Wright gives access to his intimacy, his deep secrets and desires. Our analysis of his poem will focus on two major points: the apparently disappointing effect of the title, and the unusual disposition of the poem as a whole.
Usually, the aim of a title is to set the tone and to announce what will follow; it is actually a play with our expectations as readers. Here, we are before something very precise, as indicated by the definite article "the", a specific box that will become "my" box in the last two stanzas. Moreover, the pre-modifying adjective "magic" conveys an idea of supernatural elements, so much so if we associate the expression with that of "Pandora 's Box". Thus, from the very title, the imagination of the readers is set into motion, taking them far away from reality. But as we read along, we can feel a bit disappointed as though the title had deceived us inasmuch as magic does not seem obvious in these twenty-four lines. Indeed, we only go as far as finding exoticism - from a Western point of view, that is - in the words "sari" (line 2) and "Gujarati" (line 10) that take us to India, or to China (line 3). There actually is only one passage that could be associated with the notion of magic - the fourth tercet (lines 14-16), where the addresser displays the powers of imagination through invention ("a fifth season"), an oxymoron ("black sun") and a reversal between a witch and a cowboy. On the whole, what in fact appears extraordinary is putting tiny as well as enormous things, or ideas, in this box, made of unusual matter as shown in the last but one quatrain (lines 17-20). Incidentally, the ternary rhythm line 17 does emphasize the particularities of the box, and the run-on line lines 19-20 seems to imitate the hinges of the lid.
Kit Wright is a British author emphasis added emphasis added literal meaning (extra-ordinary), i.e. what goes beyond the mere experience of everyday life.
And the magic of the poem does actually lie there - in the blending of manner and matter. Indeed, although there is no rhyming scheme whatsoever, the anaphora of the phrase "I will put in the box", highlighted by the following blank space and the recurring enjambments that imitate the movement of putting something in some place, can be seen as a sort of incantation, an enchanting spell. The two finite verbs we come across in the poem - "will put" and "shall surf" (lines 1, 5,9,13 and 21) - , indicate, on the same level, a strong intention and a flawless commitment from the addresser. Many lines do reproduce the sound(s) they signify, like the alliteration on the dental /t/, line 4, that imitates the sound of the tip of the tongue touching a tooth; or line 7. apart from the usual copulative verb 'to be'.
I would therefore say that the title is not deceptive at all for magic is conjured up through the actual words and the meticulous layout of the poem. It actually is something magical because a poem is a creation (of a world) and as such, magic is in Poetry itself. from the Greek                , to create.
As suggested in my previous conclusion, magic, i.e. great imagination making you fly above reality so to speak, lies in Poetry. My own response is 'poetic' in the sense that it is a creation, using and playing with language as a magic tool.
My text mainly shares one common point with the previous one - the action of putting things in a very particular box. The way it is built is actually interesting because, in the first poem, the elements may be symbolic, even more so since they are emphasized thanks to a ternary rhythm (line 17). We can only venture guesses: gold for preciousness, steel for strength and nobody will ever be able to force the box? As for the second treasure chest, the stress is laid on the colour - green. It commonly stands for Hope. Yet, the shape is as important because the circle is the figure of harmony. Furthermore, the atmosphere of the whole second part is 'poetic' and 'magic' owing to the sounds: throughout the first sentence, for instance, there is a mix of alliterations on the dentals /d/ and /t/ and on the fricative /s/ along with the assonance on /i/. The confusion of the elements is also poetic: the water of the sea becomes the tears; the sentence standing on its own can refer to the weather outside but also implicitly refers to the inner feelings of the poet; the poet is dealing with abstractions that have turned concrete through language. chest being understood in two senses... the 'quality' that has remained after Pandora opening the box, in the Greek myth.
Let 's eventually point out that the reader witnesses two different kinds of dialogue, that are in sharp contrast with the committed tone of the declaration of Wright 's poem, where no real addressee can be found. First, there is a reconstituted conversation between the poet and his closest friend: the question is given directly, having been rephrased (hence, the change of pronouns). The response could have been given in many ways and I have chosen to make a simple list. As for the second dialogue, as specified by the verb "converse", it happens between the poet and the natural elements. the first four tercets of "The Magic Box" are a mere list, after all.
This piece of writing therefore establishes a dialogue between itself and the reader, who will go back and forth, inferring from the text, understanding it and creating his own world through the magic of words.
