As the emergence and constantly increasing use of the Internet, visual communication of Website design, travel and tourism product in particular, has been and continued to be one of the most essential segmentation where marketers and advertisers lay emphasis on. On the other hand, gender difference varies the visual images seen by the travel information searchers and the patterns of their consumption, which has outlined the need for understanding the attitude and preference for visual representation of online searchers/potential consumers, from a gender perspective. In order to reflect this implication, this research paper attempts to examine the interconnected relation between the Internet, online visual communication, and gender difference, and to explore the various ways of interpretation and preference with regard to visual content of tourism product websites influenced by genders. The methodology employed in this paper is evaluating and reviewing existing literature based on secondary data in the fields of marketing communication, visual communication, consumer behaviour, and gender studies. The assumptions arise in the paper, within views of gender difference, are to highlight the role of pictorial representation in online marketing communication of tourism product, and to bring out the various aspects of seeing online visual representation in tourism destination websites depending on genders. Although, likely, there are other variables which may also make impact on online visual communication between tourism websites and consumers, such as the form of modernity, intercultural difference, social status, education, and composition of travel party, and so forth, this paper anticipates proposing a comprehension that is constructive for further studies. Of great concern for marketing managers in tourism industry, recommendations for more effective internet marketing strategies and Website design are provided.
Visual Communication, Internet Marketing Strategies, Consumer Behaviour, Gender, Tourism destination. "Modern life takes place onscreen", Mirzoeff assumed (1999). Presently, human beings are living in a media-oriented world that is all about image. Hundreds of visual messages flash in people 's eyes daily via new media such as the Internet, big screen, and traditional media, such as photography, video, television programme, as well as printed materials (e.g. newspaper, magazine, poster, brochure, etc). In 1998, twenty-three million Americans were daily users of the Internet (Mirzoeff, 1999); by 2006, ninety-seven million American adults (about 66% of total population in U.S.) use the Internet on an average day (Pew Internet & American Life Project, 2006). Since the internet is capable of such large amount of 'audience', marketers and advertisers see it as a new marketing environment of importance. In fact, Leopold (HSMAI, Marketing Review, 2006) indicated that all consumers daily experience more than 3,000 marketing and advertising messages from a variety of media sources.
On the subject of a company 's marketing communication strategies, Fox (2005) laid stress on the importance of designed graphic images or pictorial representation. A successful visual image may represent the core issue of the product itself, draw target customers' attention, and more outstandingly, make the image attach in the audience 's mind. The usage of multiple media as described above presenting pictorial or graphic images, contributes a more effective and cost-saving method to marketers in communicating with their target consumers (Dijkstra, M et al, 2003). This supports Oliva 's argument (1998) about the benefit of choosing the Internet as a marketing communication tool, which helps marketers and advertising planners reduce cost, discover new market, transform relationship, and add better value to the shareholder.
With regards to the tourism industry, Lake (2001) argued that the Internet has been one of the most essential sources for travel information search. Evidence shows that people in the twenty-first century have a significant tendency to surf on the Internet when searching for tourism destination information, especially, when seeking for the distant places where they have never been to. On daily basis, 8 percent of 97 million Internet users in U.S. seek for travel information online on daily basis, while 3 percentage purchases or makes a reservation for travel online (Pew Internet & American Life Project, 2006). Further, a recent research (Kim et al, 2006) pointed out that both gender of Internet users spent nearly 5 hours online for planning their recent trips. Therefore, as the reliance on the Internet for potential travellers to obtain travel information online is considerable, the increased need of understanding online users' attitudes and behaviours for a Tourism Marketer has become more and more fundamental.
However, the information (including literal context and visual image) seen by the searcher (potential customer) may vary depending on the different genders. Meyer-Levy 's previous research (1988) demonstrated that females tended to explore more detailed information before making decisions, while males relied on more objective cues, only available information, and their own opinions. Compared with males, females are regarded to be more "visually-oriented, more intrinsically motivated, and more romantic" (Holbrook, 1986). Over two decades, a recent research examined this argument and proved that, in modern times, gender differences influence the attitude and preference of the online users when searching travel information online, and hence have impact on decision making and consumer behaviour (Kim D et al, 2006).
Yet, as online travel information includes literal context and pictorial representation, what is the communication and functionality of pictorial representation (such as still visual image and dynamic images) in online tourism marketing? Moreover, what are the differences of perceived pictorial image and hence of consumer behaviour from a gender perspective? For the reason that little research related to the issues mentioned above has been performed, this paper involves the approaches of existing literature review and secondary data analysis in an attempt to bridge the academic gap and contribute better understanding of the effectiveness in current applied tourism marketing strategies on the Internet and the diverse role of visual communication in online tourism product websites between female and male. This paper is also anticipated to bring out implications for further studies in the field and recommendations of more effective marketing approaches on tourism destination websites for managers and advertisers in the industry.
Communication in Marketing has long been seen as merely a promotion tool, while Varey argues (2001); every communication undertaken is meant to be the mode for marketing in modern times. Since marketing concept is centred on the concept of exchange, the theories of communication are supposedly on the basis of exchange and ought to account for 'the co-production of identity, meaning and knowledge' (Deetz, 1992). That is to say, marketing communication, as to a business, not only engages with promoting a set of communication practices that are designed to cause cognitive, affective, conative and behavioural responses from customers' end (Schramm, 1948), but also treats as a relationship between supplier and buyer that shares product information and brand knowledge with one mind and another, and hence achieves the objective of communication- producing purchase intention (Dijkstra et al, 2005; Schramm & Roberts, 1971). In particular for hospitality and tourism industry, Bowie and Buttle (2004) points out, reflecting the similar concept, that marketing communication strategy is a process to inform, to persuade, and built up the relationship between the business and target market. Taken the nature of tourism product into account, which exists only as information at the point of sale and can not be sampled before the purchase decision is made (WTO Business Council, 1999), it strengthens the weight of marketing communication strategies, more than ever in post-modern times, since those strategies offers global reach and capacity of multimedia to promote and distribute tourism products and services (Walle, 1996).
In order to look forward to better understanding in the importance of the Internet as a marketing communication tool, taking a historical review of communicational technology development in marketing environment can not be separated from this paper 's discussion. Table 1 below is thus intended to summarily represent the evolution of the context for marketing developments between communication tools and business orientations, based on Varey 's thoughts (2001). Although marketing communication strategies are not driven by technologies, it is believed that the expansion of media technologies has enhanced marketers' capacity to communicate with consumers about the availability and desirability of their products (Kline, 1993). Following the advent of media technology since late twentieth, such as the Internet, WWW, mobile, Digital TV and so on, every of new development in communication technology contributes further possibilities to the firms (Varey, 2001) and have forced a new thinking of marketing communication- Increased interactivity, for the reason that, via new media, consumers have begun engaging in marketing relationships and hence become co-producers in conversation with the suppliers of good and services (Varey, 2001). Take it as an example, instead of relying on traditional marketing communication media (i.e. Newspaper ads or pamphlets) to look for promoting cheaper flight tickets and tour packages, modern travel planners may easily access available tourist offerings and the most updated flight fares on the websites of EasyJet, RyanAir and other European budget airlines, in multiple language choices, then order the tourism products online as their wishes, and possibly leave comments with its online customer service centre after purchasing or consuming the services ( ; ).
Ever since late ninetieth, the Internet has been widely used around the world and increasingly been distinguished as a crucial commercial medium and market environment (Hoffman & Novak, 1996), which will predictably result in the death of traditional marketing functions (Holbrook & Hulbert, 2002). Its unique characteristics differentiate itself from traditional commercial and marketing communication environment by means of enhanced interactivity over the process of communication; explicitly, the Internet has 'the facility for individuals and organizations to communicate directly with one another regardless of where they are or when they wish to communicate' (Blattberg & Deighton, 1991).
The World Wide Web, also known as 'WWW' or 'the Web', is a hypermedia based on the Internet that links up information and resources from all over the world. The Web  'started to be used for marketing in 1995 as corporations like Kraft Foods and Proctor & Gamble turned to the Internet in an effort to have their products available to millions of potential customers' (Sorry, 1995; in Han & Mills, 2006). Browser software, such as Internet Explore, allows the Web to represent a multitude of media - text, video, graphics, picture, and sound - on a local computer screen, regardless of where the source of the information physically located (Berthon et al, 1996). More to the point, the Web doubtlessly is a 'many-to many' mediated communications model, different from the traditional marketing communication models, and that it makes the direct interaction in between marketers, consumers and the medium possible (Hoffman & Novak, 1996). As a result, the Web, due to the features above, enables marketers and advertisers to demonstrate full-colour content of product information and business announcement, verbally and pictorially, provide online order procedure and draw out online customer feedback.
The Internet and the Webs weight no less in tourism marketing than other commercial environment. According to the nature of tourism product which has been stated at the beginning of this section, the Internet worth being regarded as the most suitable medium employed in the industry to promote and deliver tourism product and service since its provision is relatively high in information content, anchored in Zinkhan 's opinion (2002). As well, the interactivity of the Internet encourages the building and management of relations between tourism service provider and consumer, for the initial reason that relations are particularly substantial in the nature of hospitality and tourism business. In return, online surfers benefit from the interactivity and easy-access of the Internet, which resulted in the changed ways of people 's information search behaviour. As a matter of fact, by 2001, more than 70% of travellers had visited the Internet so as to obtain travel info, as revealed by an earlier report from the World Tourism Organisation Business Council.
The thinking can also reflect on the phenomenon in recent years that many countries have recognized the potential of the Internet and World Wide Webs (www), and have developed an Internet presence to promote their tourism offerings and increase their share of the competitive global tourism market (Larson, 2004). For instance, on the homepage of its Website, Eurostar daily updates its countdown about the new launch at the UK end estimated on 14 November, 2007, switched from currently used Waterloo International Station to St. Pancras International Station, with the intention of informing, promoting about new features of Eurostar and picturing online surfers/potential customers the anticipation that 'more appealing and impressive travel experience provided by Eurostar is coming up!' (). In brief, in tourism industry, the Internet facilitates rapid information delivery and online transactions to customers, which prompts them to  'self-serve' (Urry, 2002) and make online decision making prior to actually visiting a tourism destination or consuming in a lodging service.
Therefore, it can be suggested that quality of information and web design can be decisive factors to be contemplated in Internet marketing. Since more than a decade ago, many of scholars have realised its importance as a new marketing medium, and made effort on elaboration of the Web content to identify to what extent the effectiveness of Internet marketing performs on the Web (Dijkstra et al, 2005; Larson & Ankomah, 2004; Berthon et al, 1996), as well as how Web content makes impact on online customer behaviour and attitude (Sigala, 2004; Strader, 1997). (Concerning evaluation approaches to effectiveness on the Web and the results, these aspects will be discussed in later sections).
In the following section, literature review of the characteristics and behaviour of Internet user and their response to Websites' presentation reflecting on effectiveness examination is regarded necessary and will be elaborated, with the intention of gaining academic knowledge of integrity in the way the Internet and Internet users 'communicate' with one another, from online customers' perspective.
In a view of marketing thinking, marketers assume that consumers' choice is rational so that they can figure out order and reason and plot predictability of rules with regard to consumers' behaviour (O'Shaughnessy, 1987). Earlier scholars (Punj & Staelin, 1983) assumed that once a consumption activity is recognized and needed to be done, the consumer would tend to carry out a functional information search to improve the quality of purchasing outcome. Nowadays, the availability of tourist information sources has been extended by the advent of the Internet, which supports not only the features of mass broadcasts but also accomplishes the traits of one-to-one communications by means of text, visual image, video on the Webs (McGaughey & Mason, 1998). The popularity of the use of Internet as a new medium is still escalating (refer to the recent figures in Introduction), and the information searchers are no more limited from geographical distance when it comes to acquiring travel information. Consequently, also approved by Lou et al (2004), understanding the factors that differentiate online information search behaviour can be predicted to benefit hospitality and tourism marketers in meeting their marketing needs and serving their customers in a more effective way.
The procedure of consumption activity generally comprises processing information, comparing and evaluating product information, and making purchase decision rationally (Varey, 2001). In the past, there were more academics cling to the theory that consumers are passive recipients of commercial information and promotional messages (Varey, 2001), while today, consumers become much more independent and sophisticated in using a wide range of marketing communication tools to acquire the information associated with their consumption activities. In the domain of hospitality and tourism industry, Buhalis (1998) reported that tourists' behaviour, similarly, has become more positive in searching information and the relationship between this change and the usage of the Internet has been confirmed. Kennedy (1996) also convinced that the Internet reinforced tourists performing more efficiently on online information search.
Aside from marketers' efforts to influence consumer or potential buyers, many of other aspects also manipulate in the process of consumer and potential buyers' decision making, indicated by Varey (2001), which engage in: culture and value; personality, lifestyle and psychographics; demographics; and, reference groups. More clearly,, the gurus of consumer behaviour thesis, Berkman and Gilson (1986) identified that environmental influence and individual difference are the two antecedents mutually effecting consumers' behaviour during the whole consumption process. Environmental influence involves the factors from the external environment, such as culture, gender, social status and occupation; whereas individual difference is connected with consumers' internal characteristics, such as personality, motivation and attitude. However, the validity of measuring these factors has been questioned by different schools. Thus, Bonn et al (1998) argued that demographic characteristics could be better used as criteria to examine the influence on consumer behaviour, while others gave credits to situational factors (Snepenger et al, 1990; in Lou et al, 2004), which accounted for trip purpose, past experience (Chen & Gursoy, 2000), travel party composition, the presence of acquaintances at the destination (Cai et al, 2001), and the degree of novelty of the destination. Particularly, in their recent research, Lou et al (2004) found out that gender and household income showed more significance than other demographic factors concerning tourists' behaviour and attitude toward the travel and tourism websites (i.e. education level, age, vocational difference, and so on). More specifically, current studies have revealed that consumer behaviour with regard to information search on the Internet varies depending on different genders, which has been proved that it could be applied to hospitality and tourism industry as well (Teo, 2001; Sigala, 2004).
Therefore, it can be recommended that, tourism marketers should take the dimension of gender into account when the marketers are devoted into the design of their websites and the arrangement of its Web content. And, in order to be consistent with the interest of this paper, gender only, as a demographic factor that have been examine by previous research, will be elaborated more with the intention of understanding the connection and conversation between gender and the visual representation on the webs in Section. 5.
Within the context of Internet marketing, a numbers of Web effectiveness studies have brought out the suggestions for marketers about how to structure the Web pages to draw online surfers' attention and make them enjoy their online surfing experience. In their book, Rosenfeld and Morville (1998; in O'Connor, 2004) pointed out five dimensions of Web design to marketers and advertisers: Language; Layout; Information architecture, which means the arrangement of the context and features on the Websites; User interface; and General issues on design and management, which are not the focuses in this report. Aside from this, other similar sets of factors effecting the Web presentation have been identified as well, by Smith (2001, in O'Connor, 2004): Ease of navigation; Uncluttered and clear content and layout; whether standard HTMAL is used; and whether the design allows the site to be accessed at low bandwidth and by users with less advanced technology or with disabilities. More lately, Han & Mills (2006) placed emphasis on three features of the marketing effectiveness on the basis of hospitality and tourism Websites: aesthetics features that accounts for destination visualisation and Web design; informative features, which comprises uniqueness, monetary value and cultural promotion; and interactive features of e-travel planners and online communities. Undoubtedly, there are a few more of studies contributed different sets of broad advices on effectiveness of Internet marketing for marketers/advertisers/web designers. However, Web content has been regarded by all of the researchers as one of the most essential component that can not be ignored or underestimated when it comes to the effectiveness of the Websites.
With regard to Web content, it consists of not only text-based information but also pictorial presentation. However, a wide variety of tourism studies (Lagrosen, 2005; Douglas & Mills, 2004; So & Morrison, 2004; Doolin et al, 2002) mainly focused on the evaluation of textual context only on tourism websites and developed several kinds of examination approaches, while little research (Jeong & Choi, 2004) has dwelled upon the influence of visual representation and pictorial presentation on the Websites. For the purpose of this report, the literature review from visual communication perspective is assumed to be useful and widen the vision of the knowledge in this field. The discussion of functionality and effects of visual representation/pictorial presentation on seers' attitude and behaviour and the application to hospitality and tourism websites will be elicited in the next section.
Before the popularity of the Internet, pictures had been considered one of the most effective marketing communication tools with regard to advertising. According to their research, Edell et al. found that more than 55% of travel planners tended to be influenced by the pictures embedded in the advertisements on their choice of decision (1983). Pictures help marketers and advertisers to draw customers' attention, project desirable visual image and the condition of tourism product into customers' mind and also create their brand images. Leongal. (1996) reported that pictures, compared to text, are more memorable and easier for creating an impression of products or services on customers, based on their research findings, because pictures has the capacities of imaginary and verbal codes in customers' memory whereas text produces verbal codes only.
In the hospitality and tourism industry, as mentioned earlier in this report, the use of the Internet assists marketers and advertisers to overcome the disadvantage of the intangible nature of tourism products and services; on the other hand, it also facilitates customers to obtain more comprehensive information about the products and services in the process of their decision-making (Koernig, 2003). Picture presentation online, moreover, can add tangible cues to intangible tourism product and services and helps customers engage in mentally imaging the benefit and even virtually experiencing their dreaming destination (Klein, 2003). More expressly, in their studies, Jeong & Choi (2004) endeavoured to measure the effectiveness of picture presentation on hotel Websites for an attempt to identify customers' attitude and behavioural intention. They concluded that picture content and realism of picture on the Web appeared to be the powerful indicators of customer attitudes; that is to say, the more numbers of pictures performing the tourism product and services as well as the pictures featured employees and previous customers shown on the website, the more favourable customers' attitude emerges.
From a visual communication perspective in which it phrases picture as photograph, as soon as photography existed, travel photographs appeared (Osborne, 2000). From the tourist point of view, travel photograph visualises the context of tourist attractions and experience to last the holiday longer than it had ever been; at the meanwhile, it brings visions of the destinations back to those people who have never been to the places, stimulates their imaginary, and encourages them to 'consume the places'- that is, travelling-in the future (Urry, 2002). Coupled with Urry 's thoughts, Schroeder (2002) pointed out the importance of recognizing the visual image of a destination for both marketers and travellers. Travellers perform travel action and purchase tourism product with an expectation for experiencing the so-called authentic products, for example, British Fish & Chips, Naples Pizza, Greek cheese or Parisian Caf  . Oppositely, tourism marketers, particularly for tourism destination marketers, retail their products combined with the image of the destinations to meet customers' needs of consuming places (Schroeder, 2002). Earlier, Urry (1995) stated that 'the tourist gaze' is in fact focusing on particular characteristics and objects of travel destination, such as Paris and Eiffel Tower, London and Big Ben, New York and Time Square, artistic works, specialised food and so on. Therefore, understanding and positively positioning the icons of the destinations can be fundamental on tourism marketers and advertisers' choices of pictorial representation to customers (Human, 1999).
In his recent book, again, Schroeder (2004) confirmed the interactive connection between photography, advertising and visual consumption, on a basis of consumer research. As the advance of information technology, the internet requires photography or pictorial presentation as one of the components to perform the content marketers or Web designers assign, while photographs of advertising and promotion become more and more dominant force with regard to marketing communication since the visual images spread out rapidly over the globe via the Internet (Schroeder & Borgerson, 2002). However, reflecting on the academic gap mentioned above, only a few of research has placed emphasis on photography/pictorial presentation in the field of marketing and consumer behaviour (Belk, 1998). Schroeder argued that it might result from the complex and elusive nature of visual consumption which formed barriers for scholars and students to unveil and analyse the knowledge in this area (2004).
Moreover, an insight of art historical and intercultural knowledge would offer assistance to marketers and advertisers in positioning and understanding the concept, identity, and intention of photography/pictorial representation, Schroeder recommended (2004). Take it as an example, the photography of the advertisements of CK ONE that first published in 1999 involved two art historical genres: Group portraits, generally linked to 'Golden era of Dutch art' and performed strong masculinity; and fashion photography, mostly associated with women than men. By means of integrating these two gendered genre of art historical techniques, the ads of CK ONE successfully performed a genderless image to the public and drew much of customers' attention, without customers figuring out why (Schroeder, 2000). The need for qualified marketers and advertisers and continuous training in art historical and intercultural aspects is therefore emerged.
Echoing to the research results from marketing and consumer behaviour perspective that has been discussed earlier in this paper, it can be persuaded that gender, as a demographic characteristic, makes significant impact on online consumers' decision making during the process of consumption activities. For example, at the earlier stage when the internet became popular in the ninetieth 's, Internet users were dominantly males and males tended to process information online faster than females (Harrison & Rainer, 1992). By twentieth-first century, researchers (Teo, 2001; Sexton et al, 2002) found that, still, men were more likely to be Internet users and utilize the Internet for more kinds of activities. More familiarity toward the use of the Internet and the operational computer skills in men resulted in that women showed more anxiety when using the Internet than men (Ono & Zavodny, 2003). However, following the rapid change of technology adoption and consumers' adoption to the Internet, in terms of travel planning, more and more women tend to share the responsibility and search travel information online actively, and also become primary decision-maker among the household (Kim et al, 2006).
In recent years, a number of researchers argue that gender difference is in fact not significant in processing cognitive messages (O'Keefe, 2002), while it is still evident that women are easier to persuade and more adept in interpreting non-verbal communication than man, such as sighs, visual-images, and sounds (Everhart et al, 2001), which is unfailing with Wood 's statement (1966): compared to men, women responded to non-verbal message by inducing more 'associative' and 'imagery-laced' interpretation and presenting more descriptions. Accordingly, this can be suggested that female may be more easily stimulated more by the metaphors designed in marketing promotions or advertisements.
From the review of sociological literature, Urry did not develop the context in 'engendered' tourist gaze (Urry, 1995), though, other feminist scholars have made effort in this phenomenon. As the growing number of female tourists and travel planners, however, females may not see the travel destination as the way men see it, even though females and males share the similar characteristics in respect of social status, educational level, and reference groups (Deem, 1996). Assumedly, this argument can also be applied to the various way of women 's seeing the pictorial representation on travel and tourism Websites, compared to men. Contradictorily, rooted in her research findings, Massey (1994) disclosed that male power have been the mainstream with regard to tourism and the male gaze make strong influence on opposite gender, as if female travel-makers mostly have gendered notions reflecting on their tourist gaze. For example, during the research interviews, a number of women were interrupted or corrected by their male companion on the subject of travel destination information or definition of tourism. On the other hand, it is also revealed that women tend to focus on the travel destination where women are the major consumers, so are the major employers, such as department stores, and day-care services. These findings may contribute some pieces of implication for marketers and advertisers on what (in relation to travel destination or tourist product) can be generally seen and what will be desired to see by females whilst female take part into the performance of travelling, from travel information gathering, online purchase, to travel destination consuming.
Within the scenario of the gender roles playing in travel planning which results in purchase action eventually or not, there is a need for tourism marketers and website designers to re-think of the arrangement of Web content and accessibility, from the view of gender difference, so as to segment the increasing groups of female online searchers, provide more favoured information, and serve the travel public in a more effective way. In this case, comprehending and identifying how opposite genders process information and 'read' visual representation in a different way is considered to be crucial.
Previous research revealed that, although most travel planners search for travel information online, 81% of them do not make purchases online (GUV, 1999) and 75% of them discontinue/cancel the process of online transaction (BizRate, 1999), and more amazingly, 80% of Web users do not revisit the Websites (NVision, 1999). As a result, with the growing importance of selling tourism product and service online and the increasing number of potential travellers surfing on the Internet seeking for travel information, there is indeed a necessity of a better understanding in how to structure an effective Web content to impress the surfers/potential travellers at the first moment, for great concerns to online tourism marketers.
This paper adopts approaches of literature review and secondary data analysis, from a historical perspective, to comprehend the knowledge in the advent of the Internet and the benefit of using the Internet as a marketing communication medium, along with its application in hospitality and tourism industry. The communication and functionality of pictorial representation/visual representation/photography on travel and tourism website is the greatest concern in Web effectiveness in this paper. Only little research, however, associated with the effectiveness of pictorial representation on the Web has been elicited and elaborated. Therefore, this paper first endeavours to identify the difference in online consumer behaviour from an angle of socio-demographics, and discusses what do potential travellers possibly long to gaze upon on the travel and tourism websites from a visual consumption viewpoint and argues that opposite genders may differ the way potential travellers process the travel information on the Websites, with an attempt to indicate the key aspects that tourism marketers should lay stress on.
As a matter of fact, an assumption can be laid out, through the propositions discussed through the paper, that the relation between pictorial presentation and gender difference is positive and preferences and effectiveness of visual representation online diverse depending on the genders, within the context of travel and tourism websites. However, this assumption needs further empirical studies to examine and contribute a proof, since little existing literature is capable to consolidate this point of view. Another limitation of this paper direct to the lack of discussion in tourists' consumer behaviour linked with the shift from a solid and fixed modernity to a much more fluid and speeded-up liquid modernity (Baumann, 2000)., in which tourists' decision-making and purchase behaviours might be influenced. Do tourists and potential travellers' lifestyle, consumer behaviour and attitude alter due to the change of the form of modernity? This implication also requires further review of existing literature and future research to answer the question.
Last but not the least, since the issues centralised in this paper requests further experimental studies to develop a clearer and novel framework of the effects of pictorial representation on travel and tourism websites from a gender perspective, with a hope to contribute guidance on adequate methodologies, a brief review of research approaches those have been done to Website effectiveness evaluation is presented as following: by 2006, there were 56 papers published that dealt with tourism marketing on the Internet and presented 47 different research approaches, such as modified Balance Scored Card, Rating systems, Web analysis model, and so on, which were used to evaluate the content of hospitality and tourism destination website, based on Han & Mills 's findings (Referred to Appendix 1).
