The following essay will discuss current practices in recruitment and selection in the hospitality and tourism industry in the context of achieving employee 'fit'. The essay will outline the importance of HRM strategies within the context of recruitment and selection. It will discuss the impacts of certain characteristics of the hospitality and tourism industry on these strategies as well as recruitment and selection.
Current recruitment and selection methods, such as the job description, the application form, interviews and even psychometric testing are viewed to be 'established good practice in objective recruitment and selection [...] by writers such as Price (1994)' (McGunnigle & Jameson 2000, pg. 407). Objectivity within the process of recruitment and selection is very important in terms of avoiding discrimination towards sex, age or ethnical minorities.
According to Torrington et. Al. (2002) the job description is the most conventional approach within the recruitment process and is clearly one of the competency-based recruitment and selection methods, where 'competencies are identified only on the job performance' (Mitrani et. Al. ed. 1993, pg.69), rather than on personal qualifications. The interview on the other hand could be considered as a rather subjective selection tool, because as stated by Torrington et. Al. (2002) the interviewer makes a definite decision within the first three minutes, based on seeing only the appearance and the application form of the applicant. Within the UK hotel industry, the interview is  'still the dominant selection tool' (McGunnigle & Jameson 2000, pg. 414) and therefore questions the objectivity of selection methods within the hospitality industry.
Psychometric testing is used in organisations mainly to achieve high commitment within, or 'to get the right people on board' (McGunnigle & Jameson 2000, pg. 407) in the first place. This method helps to 'identify changes in work and organisation[s], which seek to render attitudes and behaviour of employees' (Winstanley et. Al. 1996, pg. 7) as well as 'to shape employee identity and secure motivations and definitions of interest' (Winstanley et. Al. 1996, pg. 7). Due to the fact, that psychometric testing deals with attitude, behaviour and motivation, there is a contradiction with the argument of objectivity put forward by Price (1994) as mentioned above. Furthermore some authors raised some ethical concerns about methods, such as psychometric tests. Winstanley et. Al. (1996) states, that those organisations using these methods take the right to intrude into the subjectivity of the employees to scrutinize and manipulate them. Putting forward these ethical fears, ones could also question the normal, informal all-day conversations between managers and operative staff, which result the same subjective information about attitude, behaviour and motivation. A strong argument to ease those ethical issues might be the unique characteristics of the hospitality and tourism industry, such as 'intangibility, perishability, variability, simultaneous consumption and production and inseparability' (Korczynski 2002, pg. 5), which might explain the necessity of subjectivity. However, it seems to be important to find the right mixes of recruitment and selection methods within an organisation, rather than only focusing on one in particular.
Moving on to the argument of the right mix, finding the right mix of recruitment and selection methods is strongly dependent on the HRM strategy of the organisation. Christensen Hughes (2002) differs between four different methods: the traditional HRM, which focuses on worker productivity through selection and job design, integrative HRM, which focuses on congruency of internal fit, strategic HRM, which focuses on overall competitive strategy and finally the universal HRM, which focuses on commitment and motivation in the workforce. There are two different approaches that depend on the HRM strategy of an organisation. The  'soft approach with an emphasis on strategic interventions for commitment and development [and the] hard approach [which] emphasis on strategic interventions to secure full utilization of labour resources' (Worsfold 1999, pg. 340). Both approaches are based on the human capital theory and clarify whether an organisation should 'internalise employment and build [an] employee skill base through training and development initiatives [...or] externalise employment by outsourcing certain functions to market based agents' (Lepak & Snell 1999, pg. 31). The hospitality and tourism industry has several service market characteristics, such as 'mass-service markets' (Boxall 2003, pg. 12), 'mix of mass markets and higher value-added segments' (Boxall 2003, pg. 14) and the 'very significantly differentiated markets' (Boxall 2003, pg. 14). As stated by Worsfold (1999) it would therefore be reasonable to assume that sectors in the mass-service markets, such as the fast food industry would adopt the hard approach with it 's emphasis on control, whereas within the differentiated markets, such as the luxury hotel sector, the soft approach with its emphasis on engendering commitment might be considered appropriate.
Considering the different HRM strategies and the "soft" and "hard" approach of recruitment and selection it is important to mention that recruitment and selection is inseparable from training and development. Using the universal HRM strategy with a soft approach to recruitment and selection requires ongoing training and development in order to achieve commitment within the workforce and build up a skilled labour pool. On the other hand it also brings up the question, whether a high level of commitment through universal HRM is necessary within the hospitality and tourism industry in order to gain competitive advantage, due to it 's different service market characteristics. Lepak & Snell (1999) state that in addition to full-time employees the hospitality and tourism industry is dependent on external workers, such as temporary employees or contract laborers. Winstanley et. Al. (1996) also recognises that the economy is characterised increasingly by sub-contracting. In addition to the unique characteristics mentioned above, the hospitality and tourism industry needs to deal with seasonality, which would explain the need for external labour. Another angle to question is the necessity of commitment rather than productivity being from a financial point of view. Even though internal recruitment would 'lower transaction costs' (Lepak & Snell 1999, pg. 31), external recruitment 'decrease[s] overhead and administration costs' (Lepak & Snell 1999, pg. 31). Furthermore McGunnigle & Jameson (2000) argue that within the UK hotel industry there is a weak internal and a strong external labour market, which leads to the assumption that these more expensive recruitment and selection methods, which achieve commitment within the workforce, are unnecessary, when there is cheap external labour supply is available.
According to Mullins (1995) the hospitality and tourism industry has a high level of staff turnover in comparison to other industries. In the hotel and guesthouse sector almost 45% of all new workers left their employer within the first three month, even though most of the turnover are shifts within the industry (Mullins 1995). The 'high levels of labour turnover experienced by the hotel industry [resulted that] recruitment was found to be a dominant activity' (Kelliher & Johnson 1997, pg. 321). Guerrier and Lockwood (1989) point out, that the turnover rate is the only distinction between core and peripheral employees. Core and peripheral employees are explained in 'Atkinson 's model of the flexible firm' (Torrington et. Al. 2002) as in Appendix I. Peripheral employees are numerical flexible, whereas core employees are functional flexible. Based on Atkinson 's model, the high rate of labour turnover within the hospitality and tourism industry can partly be explained with the numerical flexibility of peripheral employees. Bagguley (1990) states that employers, who face high variations in demand for personal service, such as in hotels and catering, seek labour flexibility through part-time employment. On the other hand there are the 'core functionally flexible workers [who] are thought to be more committed to the organisation' (Bagguley 1990, pg. 739). There is a need for both, core and peripheral employees within an organisation in order to be flexible, therefore there is also a need for recruitment and selection for the both, core and peripheral workers. In this respect, a difference of recruitment and selection was pointed out by McGunnigle and Jameson (2000) within their research in the UK hotel industry. The results showed that there seemed to be less care for the recruitment on an operative level, whereas management and supervisory positions were recruited under much stricter conditions. A general manager of one hotel surveyed in McGunnigle and Jameson 's (2000) research said:
Returning to the argument of high staff turnover rates within the hospitality and tourism industry Worsfold (1999) argues that the turnover is partly a consequence of the lack of opportunities for training and development rather than the lack of job satisfaction. This again puts emphasis on the cooperation of recruitment and selection with training and development. 'A focus on systems and procedures, training [and development] and performance measures of employees' (Worsfold 1999, pg. 342) indicates a quality management. Quality improvements within an organization can lead to increased productivity, performance and profits and therefore give competitive advantage to the organisation.
In conclusion, current recruitment and selection methods have shown effectiveness and reliability in the past, whereas some are objective and others rather subjective. Due to the fact, that the hospitality and tourism industry has some unique characteristics compared to other industries, it is important to find the right mix of recruitment and selection methods and it also questions the need for objectivity to recruitment and selection to an extent. However, in the context of achieving employee 'fit' it is important to consider different HRM strategies and therefore different approaches to recruitment and selection, such as the 'hard' and  'soft' approach. There is a need for an organisation to decide on whether to internalize or externalize labour, which is directly linked to commitment and productivity, as well as to Atkinsons (1984) theory of a flexible firm. Considering that a flexible firm needs both, peripheral and core employees, this indicates that an organisation needs to recruit externally as well as internally. Furthermore on the ground of externalisation and internalisation one can assume that recruitment and selection cannot be separated from training and development in order to create 'quality culture' (Worsfold 1999, pg. 342) within an organisation and for that organisation to be competitive in the industry.
This indicates a need for development of the recruitment and selection as well as the training and development. Furthermore, Torrington et. AL. (2002) states that there will be changes in the external environment of the hospitality and tourism industry. There will be demographical changes in the labour market, which will put an intensive focus on pensions in terms of recruitment and selection, as well as the changes of skills and qualifications that will have an impact on recruitment and selection (Torrington et. Al. 2002). Globalisation will also have an impact on recruitment and selection in terms of diversity within the workforce and in terms of recruitment and selection methods considering 'e-recruitment' (Torrington et. Al. 2002, pg. 178).
However, considering all aspects including different HRM strategies, unique characteristics of the hospitality and tourism industry, training and development, the high level of staff turnover and the aspects of the flexible firm and quality management indicate that there is a need for development of current recruitment and selection methods in order to achieve employee 'fit' in terms of commitment and productivity.
