In recent years, discourses of post colonialism have drawn attention to what Chris Brookes calls the 'major and continuing significance of the cultural products' of the British Empire over its four centuries of rise and fall. There is a veritable plethora of work anthologising these writings; however, in this anthology my aim is to look at the after-effects of British colonialism in India and to focus on the writings of the ex-colonies rather than the ex-colonisers. In Edward Said 's Culture and Imperialism (1993) he discuses the importance of imperialism 'in shaping the modern world' and asserts 'connections between British imperialism and literature." Although he is referring to the effects it had in shaping the image held by much of the Western world of the East, the effects of the British Raj in India were far reaching within India itself, in that educated Indians in the nineteenth century began to respond to Western thought and literature. It is almost one hundred and fifty years since native Indian troops in Meerut mutinied, resulting eventually in the end of colonial rule in India; it was not until the withdrawal of the British that the phenomenon of Indian verse written in English began seriously to exist.
C. Brooks, P. Faulkner (ed.) The white man 's burdens: an anthology of British poetry of the Empire, (GB, University of Exeter Press, 1996) Introduction pp. 1.
Cited in C. Brooks, P. Faulkner (ed.) The white man 's burdens: an anthology of British poetry of the Empire, (GB, University of Exeter Press, 1996) Introduction pp. 2.
In this short collection of poems I have looked for those which can be said to be 'Indian in sensibility and content, and English in language." This is poetry 'made out of thoughts and feelings, not the objects which give rise to them." Although all the poets included here also write in a variety of Indian languages, I have excluded poems written in any of the native Indian languages and translated into English. This is not, by any means, because such poetry is of no account. On the contrary, poetry has been a traditional form of expression in India for 'more than two and a half millennia;' without enormously over-extending the length of this anthology, all the work of such beauty and account could not be included. R. Parthasarathy states that 'in our time poetry is becoming increasingly concise." For this reason I have intentionally steered away from a multitude of brief Indian poetry such as much of the work of Vikram Seth, and included some longer, lyric poetry.
R. Parthasarathy (ed.) Ten Twentieth Century Indian Poets, (India, Oxford University Press. 1976) Introduction pp. 2.
I. M. Parsons (ed.) The Progress of Poetry: An Anthology, (GB, Chatto & Windus, 1937) introduction xiii.
M. Alexander, (ed.) Indian Love Poems, (Germany, Everyman 's Library, 2005).
R. Parthasarathy (ed.) Ten Twentieth Century Indian Poets, (India, Oxford University Press. 1976) Introduction pp. 9.
The poetry that I have included in this anthology is 'rooted in and stems from the Indian environment' although the subject matter may be concerned with other themes and places. This is intended to highlight the beautiful paradox which is at the core of Indian poetry written in English, and to draw attention the difference between the language of poems such as these and the 'liveliness and idiosyncrasy' of the language used in African or West Indian writing. R. Parthasarathy states that this is due to the fact that Indian writers in English are particularly conscious of their 'indianness,' and identifies the 'uneasy tensions' that can arise in writing in a language one is not born into. There are long traditions of literatures in Indian languages, and those poets that choose to write in English can be said to have a 'relative sophistication,' which can be seen in the particular idiom they use. 'There has always been a time-lag between the living, creative idiom of English-speaking peoples and the English used in India." The effect of this use of language can be somewhat surprising in the context of modernist poetry. For example, the use of the word 'thereon' in ibid pp. 3 ibid.
Ibid pp. 4.
R. Parthasarathy (ed.) Ten Twentieth Century Indian Poets, (India, Oxford University Press. 1976) Introduction pp. 3 and when you reach for the bark may you find the flowers thereon. (To My Daughter Rookzain by K. N. Daruwalla, ninth stanza) seems to particularly stand out.
The poems I have selected for this anthology have, for the most part, little or no use for English prosody. Due to the fact that for all of these poets English is not their first language, the emphasis is 'almost entirely on the visual as opposed to the aural element' in their verse. This can be seen clearly in D. Chitre 's poem Travelling in a Cage, in which the visual effect of the breaking up of lines such as 'nothing' in line four cuts into the deep structure of the sentence, in what Hollander (1975) calls contre-rejet. A similar effect is seen in The Gharghra in Spate by K. N. Daruwalla, in which the double pattering in the formation of the lines in the third stanza has a great effect on the imagery created by the poem and our mental picture of the water-logged landscape being described.
R. Parthasarathy (ed.) Ten Twentieth Century Indian Poets, (India, Oxford University Press. 1976) Introduction pp. 10.
Cited in R. Bradford, A Linguistic history of English Verse, (England, Routledge, 1993) pp. 206.
Other than the second poem in this anthology, The Golden Gate by Vikram Seth, there is a marked absence in these poems of special prosodic features such as metre and rhyme. However, one feature appears prominently: these poets 'favour a short as opposed to a long line as the unit of composition." Often the lines break abruptly, such as in K. N. Daruwalla 's To My Daughter Rookzain, in which each line can be said in a single breath. This has the effect of spilling over the meaning from one line to another, and forcing the line to seek a balance outside itself.
R. Parthasarathy (ed.) Ten Twentieth Century Indian Poets, (India, Oxford University Press. 1976) Introduction pp. 11.
These poems are for the most part examples of free verse, what Richard Bradford calls 'the most significant contribution by poetry to the formal aesthetics of modernism." He also tells us that in order to identify a poem we must look for a  'structure whose formal common denominator- that which separates it from non-poetic discourse- is its division into lines." Therefore it can be said that what these poems display beautifully is the idea that a poem is formed by the spaces in its lines as much as by the words: for example, that the effect of the irregular line breaks and stanza formation in Looking for a Cousin on a Swing (A.K. Ramanujan) have as much effect on it 's meaning as the imagery and language used. Free verse disrupts or rejects the conventional forms of verse, and the only common feature of free verse poems, as seen in this short collection, is the existence of syntax and the line.
R. Bradford, A Linguistic history of English Verse, (England, Routledge, 1993) pp 154.
Ibid, 'theory' pp. 1.
The order in which these poems are displayed holds no particular significance; however, as a collection of poems they are distinctive in that they all display the 'poetic qualities of metaphor." From the extended personification of the Gharghra River in The Gharghra in Spate (1), the writer becoming 'an insect of solitude' in Travelling in a Cage (5), and the summer 'hiding' behind hills in A Day of Rain (9), it is this figurative language that forms the basis of these poetic writings.
R. Bradford, A Linguistic history of English Verse, (England, Routledge, 1993) 'theory' pp. 3 'In the context of Indian verse as a whole, the contribution of poets writing in English is only marginal." Similarly, the same can be said in the context of English poetry as a whole. These poems may seem to be too much rooted in the Indian countryside and ways of life to have significance to a predominantly British readership. However it is undeniable that these poems are 'a legitimate expression of universal, human experience,' and as such have relevance beyond their immediate subject matter.
R. Parthasarathy (ed.) Ten Twentieth Century Indian Poets, (India, Oxford University Press. 1976) Introduction pp. 11.
