The objective of the laboratory is to use photoelasticity to observe the stress gradient around the discontinuity of the shoulder bar, and to determine the distribution of the stress in a cross section near the shoulder. Thus calculating the concentration factor.
Photoelasticity is the measurement of stress or strain in a stressed transparent specimen using polarised light. It is done using a polariscope.
Photoelastic measurements arose from the fact that the velocity of light through a transparent body is dependant upon the stress in that body.
The polariscope is used to combine the transmitted light components so that optical interference effects can be observed.
The polariscope consists of a light source, a filter, a polariser and an analyser. The polariser and the analyser are filters which produce plane polarised light. This is light in which traverse vibrations are restricted to movement in parallel planes.
Two types of fringe will be observed through the analyser, isoclinic and isochromatic.
An isoclinic fringe is where    (from Figure 2) equals 0 or 90  . This means that one of the principle stress directions will be parallel to the polarising axis of either the polariser or the analyser. A dark continuous band or fringe will be seen passing through these points.
The isochromatic fringe is an interference fringe. Isochromatic fringes have a fringe order where if the changes in principle stress difference are sufficient over the specimen there will be the n th order the next higher order (n+1)th on one side and the next lower order (n-1)th on the other side. The spacing between fringes is dependant on the rate of change of principle stress difference. The isochromatic fringe is seen by a dark line appearing on the specimen when loading. As the load increases so does the number of isochromatic lines.
Mount the specimen shoulder bar on the sharples polariscope.
With a load of 400N, load the bar until the fourth order isochromatic line appears on the 4.5mm radius.
Determine the position of the whole half order isochromatic lines across the section b-b using the PCX image processing software. Plot the stress profile (in fringe orders) over the section and extrapolate to obtain a fringe order at the boundary point of the section.
Determine the fringe order at the section a-a using the Tardy method.
Calculate the stress concentration factor k t using the equation given below:
Where t is the specimen thickness and f is the fringe constant.
To calculate max the stress concentration factor k t is needed.
When the material is free of load:
There is an isotrophic state where molecular change is randomly Organised.
When the material is loaded: there is an anisotrophic state. When the load is removed the specimen will return to the isotrophic state.
These are normal stresses, where the stresses are parallel with the co-ordinate system.
Principle stresses: -.
These are stresses that are not parallel to the co-ordinate system.
The circular polariscope has two fields - light and dark. The dark field is to be used, so the isochromatic lines will be counted as follows: - 0.5, 1.5, 2.5, 3.5, 4.5...
The fringe order magnitude at the edge has to be known. This will give N max which can then be used in the stress concentration factor equation.
To find the magnitude the software program PCX is used. It gives a picture as shown below:
The discontinuity shown is the edge of the specimen. This point is N max. From the picture a table can be drawn.
From this table a graph can be plotted in order to find the value of N max.
The N max value found from the graph is 3.97. The values generally found were between 3.8 and 4.1.
N nom now needs to be found from a-a. Tardy 's method will be used to do this: -.
The isochromatic lines need to be in the centre of the specimen. To do this the analyser on the front of the polariscope is moved either clockwise or anticlockwise. When the analyser is moved clockwise the 2.5 isochromatic line is forced to the centre. When the analyser is moved anticlockwise the 1.5 isochromatic line is forced to move towards the centre.
N p = isochromatic fringe order in the point of interest = N nom.
N m = isochromatic fringe order that is moved    = angle of rotation of the analyser.
Two readings were taken.
These values should be the same so two more readings are taken and an average of all four taken.
The stress concentration factor can now be calculated in order to find   max.
Where: (See graph 2).
It can be seen that the two k t values are different. There are a number of reasons for this.
Various people took the    readings from the polariscope. This can cause differences carried forward into later calculations.
The way that the specimen and isochromatic lines are seen differs with the position of the person moving the analyser. This could give different    values as is seen in tables 2 and 3. These differences mean that an average has to be taken rather than an accurate reading being used. This error is also carried on to the k t calculation.
The temperature of the material could change how it behaves when loaded. This lab was done over two days so values could have changed with the temperature causing errors.
There could also be human errors when reading graph 2 to obtain the k t values.
The stress profile across b-b was as expected with the highest stress at the edge of the specimen and gradually decreasing when nearing the centre of the specimen. The profile is shown on graph 1.
Errors in the k t value found during the experiment were minimised by taking 2 readings for each    on anticlockwise and clockwise turning of the analyser, then taking an average. This gives a more valid N nom value to be used when calculating the stress concentration factor - k t.
Stress concentration and measuring stresses in materials is very important. When designing a component the shape and materials used need to be considered and tested if they have not been tested before. If a component were used in an application where there were high concentrations of stress in a certain area the component could fatigue and fail. This could then have a knock on effect on the rest of the application components. Materials properties are known and the concentration of stress in certain shapes is also known so that a large amount of experimentation can be cut out of a design process.
Photoelasticity is a very good way of measuring stresses in certain transparent materials. It allows many different parameters and factors to be measured and is relatively quick and easy. It has drawbacks with human error involved with experimental testing.
