The purpose of this report is to determine the most effective method for analysing mechanisms. Three methods are critically evaluated by applying relevant analytical theory where necessary to build up a complete mechanism solution consisting of kinematic and Force data. The results are compared and the most suitable method chosen for use within the company.
The aim of this report is to evaluate various methods used in the analysis of mechanisms, with the intension of employing the use of the most suitable method within the company.
The primary requirement is to cut production cost by reducing the amount of work sub-contacted to other companies. To this end the chosen method of analysis will be used by the design engineers of the company to complete calculations regarding velocity, acceleration and force analysis for the mechanisms.
The chosen analytical method should therefore meet the following requirements:
The methods that will be evaluated in this report are:
In order to effectively evaluate each method for analyzing mechanisms a simple four bar mechanism has been chosen, shown in Figure 1.1. For each method a detailed analysis will be done of the mechanism and the results compared from the other methods.
Before discussing what methods were used to analyse the various methods it is necessary to highlight some of the equations that will be used.
This section is not intended to cover how the equations are derived, this can be seen either in the Appendices at the end of the report or in the reference sources where indicated.
Below is a summary of the equations used in the graphical analysis method.
Equation 2.1 - Velocity.
Equation 2.2 - Acceleration.
Equation 2.3 - Acceleration vectors.
The analytical analysis of the mechanism shown in Figure 1.1 is divided into 2 separate four bar linkages.
The first 4 bar linkage can be seen in Figure 2.1, the complex exponential vector loop equation for the linkage can be written out, this can then be expanded using the Euler expansion and separated into real and imaginary parts to get simultaneous equations. The simultaneous equations can then be solved to determine the unknowns.
The full derivation of these equations can be found in the following text,.
R.L.NORTON, Design of Machinery, 1st Edition: Position analysis - Ch 5, p176-177.
The resulting quadratic equations found by solving the simultaneous equations indicate whether the linkage is in its 'open' or 'closed' (crossed) configuration, this is indicated by real and distinct quadratic roots. It also indicates if the mechanism is bordering on stability of two configurations, that is the mechanism is able change from open to closed configuration whilst running, this is indicated by the quadratic roots being real and repeated. Lastly if the quadratic roots are complex conjugates then the mechanism is said to be non-Grashof. The Grashof condition is a simple relationship that predicts the rotation behavior of a mechanism, non-Grashof is where "no link is capable of making a full revolution with respect to the ground plane".
Grashof Condition, R.L.NORTON, "Design of Machinery", 1st Edition, Page 44.
The second four bar linkage can be seen in Figure 2.2. The complex exponential vector loop equation is then derived, and using the same process as the first four bar linkage, two simultaneous equations are developed for the two unknown values, the angle of the link DP, and the sliding link length of link CA.
Below is a summary of the five equations used in the spreadsheet analysis of the second four bar linkage. A full derivation of the 2 nd four bar linkage can be found in R.L.NORTON, "Design of Machinery", 1 st Edition, sections 4.7 - Position, 6.7 - Velocity & 7.3 - Acceleration.
Equation 2.4 - Euler Identity.
The Euler Identity is used when a complex vector equation exists, since is splits the equation into it 's real and imaginary parts. This is known as Euler Expansion.
Equation 2.5- Theta Five (  5).
Equation 2.6 - Angular Velocity Omega five (  5).
Equation 2.7 - Angular Acceleration, Alpha Five (  5).
Equation 2.8 - Variable Link Length, b(t).
Equation 2.9 - Linear Velocity b(t).
Equation 2.10 - Linear Acceleration b(t).
Working model is a 2D analysis software package that allows linkages to be modelled, and then analysed using the inbuilt measuring features.
The links are modelled using simple CAD tools. The links can be drawn as simple rectangular shapes scaled according to the mechanism dimensions, each link is assigned an appropriate name to make object selection easier when it comes to getting analysis data from the required links. Pin joints either fix links to one another or fix the link to an anchor end point, such as points O,Q,P on Figure 1.1.
As well as specifying the links dimensions, the angle of the link can also be specified. This allows the linkage to be drawn according to the specified initial crank angle. Figure 3.1 shows the naming convention that was used for the mechanism in working model. Note there are two points for each link pin.
A motor is attached to link AO and a rotational velocity is then specified.
The simulation settings in working model can be used to set the step size for the analysis, in this instance the step size was set to 5  . This is done by converting the angular velocity in to degrees per second, then calculating the time taken for the crank to rotate 5  .
Working model also allows "meters" to be placed on Linkages and points which can measure either position, velocity, acceleration or force. It is also possible for the software to record these values after each simulation step and export this data as a tab-delimited data file. This data can then be imported into a spread sheet such as excel, for further analysis.
Any physical property can be measured in the Working Model simulation software. Meters allow the user to measure the physical property of any component of the mechanism. To measure the velocity of Link AO for example, the following sequence can be done:
Select link, either by clicking directly on it, or via any of the selection windows found under the "Window" menu (Properties, Appearance, Geometry).
Next click on the "Measure" menu and extend the "Velocity" menu option.
Select how the information is to be presented, either X graph, Y graph, Rotational graph, or all of the above.
This data is displayed in a meter window as shown in Figure 3.3 which shows the velocity in both polar and Cartesian formats. The accuracy of the results can be changed in working under the menu view   numbers & units.
Measuring the position, velocity and acceleration of point C on Link BA is slightly more involved, and is described in Appendix 3.
Posted on WebCT 08/11/04 message no. 1573, by Nicolas Brooks, Title: Point C in WM.
The velocity and acceleration vector diagrams can be drawn to scale using a suitable CAD system, allowing the relative values to be read off directly.
In this report AutoCAD 2002 was used to draw the velocity and acceleration diagrams for the 4 bar linkage.
The velocity diagram for the 4 bar linkage (Figure 2.2 ) was drawn graphically, with the velocity vector of each bar being calculated using Equation 2.1, this vector quantity can then be drawn to scale using the CAD functions in AutoCAD. When vector quantities can not be calculated due to unknown rotational velocities then Lines of Action (LOA) are used. The vector quantity of the links with unknown rotational velocities can be found where their relevant LOA 's intersect on the vector diagram.
To determine the vector quantity and direction for Link AO, the following procedure was used; with reference to Equation 2.1, Velocity for link AO can be found. where,   AO is rotational velocity of link AO, 95rpm, this value needs to be converted into radians for the quantity calculation. The rotation direction is anticlockwise using the right hand co-ordinate system where a positive rotation goes from +X to +Y. The quantity V AO can be found;.
Its direction is at 90   to the links direction since point O of the Link AO is fixed.
A complete vector diagram of the linkage can be drawn using these techniques. It is important to note here that this vector diagram and therefore velocities are relevant only at the specified input angle. Changing the angle would necessitate a rework of the vector diagram. Full working of the velocity diagram can be seen in.
Appendix 1.
The acceleration vector diagram is done in the same manner as that of the velocity equation, using CAD to draw a diagram that graphically represents the acceleration vectors of the linkage.
To calculate the acceleration vector quantities Equation 2.2 is used. Each acceleration vector can consist of up to 4 separate components shown in Equation 3.1.
Equation 3.1 - Acceleration Components.
The full working for the acceleration diagram can be seen in Appendix 2.
To analyse the four bar mechanism using the equations derived from the vector loop equations the spread sheet package Excel can be used. This package allows complex mathematical functions to be evaluated according to the data input into the equations. This allows the mechanism to be evaluated for any crank angle, velocity, acceleration or force by changing the initial input values.
The Microsoft Excel software uses cells references rather than constant values, this allows equations to reference the contents of a cell rather than a constant value which updates each time data input into a cell is changed. Figure 3.5 shows a typical screen shot from the Acceleration page of the mechanism analysis. Each cell can be assigned a name which can be used in the formulas to reference a particular cell. This makes the spread sheet easier to work on since the cells name describes what value the cell is for.
The Kinematic data for position, velocity and acceleration for the mechanism can be evaluated using the mathematical functions of excel such as COS, SIN, ATAN, IF, RADIANS, DEGREES functions. A description of how these functions are used can be found in the help menu in Excel.
The force and torques of the mechanism can be determined using inverse dynamic solutions. This uses the previously calculated kinematic analysis of position, velocity and acceleration to determine the forces and torques that provide the designed accelerations.
A free body diagram of each link is produced by applying Newton 's Second Law of physics to identify the forces and torques acting on the link. From these free body diagrams the force and torque equations can be determined. These equations along with the kinematic data can be put into a matrix and the unknown forces and torques can be solved for by using the inverse matrix solution. The inverse matrix solution can be seen in Figure 3.4. Since a matrix can not be divided, the inverse is found, and then used to multiply by. The full free body diagrams and force & torque equations can be seen in Appendix 4.
Figure 3.4 - Inverse Matrix Solution.
Excel has inbuilt functions for use in matrix arithmetic, such as MINVERSE which returns the inverse of a preset matrix and MMULT which multiplies two matrix together. A matrix also known as an "array" in Excel is a defined set of cells.
Some examples of the name scheme can be seen below:
Omega3RadCross This is the angular velocity for link 3 or BA in radians for the crossed configuration.
Theta51RadCrossShift This is the angle for link 5 or DP for the crossed configuration, in radians, plus shifted by 90   (necessary for the equation analysis).
AccCAcentOpen This is the centripetal acceleration, component for point C with respect to A in the open configuration.
It is also possible to plot the results of the calculations which gives a graphical representation of mechanism.
This section displays the results found using all three methods, with a comparison of the results section in Table 4.1.
Working model allows each element of the model to be measured in various ways, such as it 's X-Y components, link angle, force on link etc.
Screen shots of the complete set of results taken from working model can be seen in Appendix 5, and are summarised in Table 4.1.
The results for the graphical method were measured using the dimension command in AutoCAD. For the purpose of this report the dimension accuracy was set to 4 decimal places. Figure 4.1 & Figure 4.2 show the velocity and acceleration diagrams respectively, with the quantitive values relative to stationary points O, P or Q. Note that these diagrams allow measurements between relative points very easily by simply measuring the distance between the two points. Since the distances are a scalar representative of the point value.
All the relevant data calculated in the excel workbook are summaries on the first sheet of the workbook, a print of these results can be found in Appendix 6.
The results from the 3 different methods have been gathered together and are displayed in Table 4.1.
AutoCAD 2D software is almost an industry standard cad package marketed by AutoDesk. Many thousands of seats have been sold for the software, which is used in a wide variety of applications. The software was used in conjunction with basic velocity and acceleration theory to produce Velocity and Acceleration vector diagrams with scalar lengths that represented the velocity or acceleration of the relevant link. Only a basic working knowledge is needed in order to produce the relevant diagrams. The CAD system allows configurations to be drawn quickly and efficiently with minimum of configuration data. Link lengths and angles can be measured off easily using the inbuilt measurement tools. The simple graphical interface allows the user to create kinematic vector diagrams that accurately represent the mechanism characteristics and display it in a simple and easy to comprehend graphical layout.
However the diagrams only represent the kinematic data for that specific mechanism configuration. This necessitates redrawing the vector diagrams for different system configurations.
Studying the AutoCAD results summarised in Table 4.1 indicate that the graphical method is indeed an acceptable method in terms of accuracy. This method is the least accurate of the three methods, primarily due to the measurements being graphically based and therefore is only as accurate the person constructing the diagram. It is however still accurate typical to 1 decimal place compared to the other two methods. Note also that this method is unable to predict the forces acting on the mechanism linkages/joints which is a major disadvantage in terms of overall mechanism analysis as it provides no information on the likely required strength of the mechanism components.
The software would require training for the employees to be able to produce the vector diagrams and the purchase of the software would necessitate a large initial outlay for the company.
The software that was used in this report was Microsoft Excel which is a component of Microsoft Office. This means that the software is available in a vast majority of companies.
The software is powerful spread sheet package that is well suited to the kinematic and Force analysis for the mechanisms. The software implements the complex vector equations to calculate the various kinematic data for the four bar mechanism. These equations are mathematically modelled using the inbuilt math functions of Excel. The software also allows data to be represented graphically with the use of various chart types (see Figure 3.6). The software can also perform a complete force analysis by solving the simultaneous equations derived by applying Newton 's 2 nd Law to the four bar mechanism. The simultaneous equations can be solved by matrix methods, which Excel has inbuilt commands for.
Comparing the result from the spread sheet to the other two methods shows high accuracy. The values agree with the working model results typically to within 2 decimal places, with the exception of the acceleration of point D which varies from the other two methods value by approximately 0.945rads -2. This variation is most likely caused by a calculation error somewhere within the worksheet. Since the values given by other two methods (working model & AutoCAD) are very similar. Unfortunately at the time of writing this error had not been resolved.
The construction of the spread sheet is very labour intensive, requiring an in depth knowledge of the theory of kinematic & force analysis. It is also prone to errors and can be long winded to find bugs in the program. However once the spread sheet has been constructed and tested the software is possibly the easiest of the 3 methods to implement, since all that is required by the user to perform a detailed analysis of the system is so simply input the mechanism configuration data. The spread sheet can be configured to only allow input data cells to be accessible to the user. Once the input data is entered in to the relevant cells in the spread sheet the analysis of the mechanism is done instantaneously and the results can be printed out within seconds of entering the data. This is something that the other methods are not capable of doing.
The software used for the analysis of the mechanism was Working Model. This a 2D motion simulation package. It allows the designer to create simulations of real life mechanical systems. The software utilises a graphical CAD user interface which is used to build up a 2D model. The model can them be analysed with fully configurable input conditions such as external Masses, Forces, Torques etc. Input conditions such as input velocity and acceleration can also be applied to the system which is then analysed by the software. Each component of the model can then be analysed by measuring the required data via the inbuilt measurement tools. This data is presented in a small results dialogue box in the CAD window. The data output type is user selectable (e.g X & Y components, Vector & angular components etc) along this the displayed units. The data can also be exported to enable data analysis outside of the software. The software is able to step through each mechanism configuration and readout the kinematic and force data for that given configuration. The resolution of the analysis is user configurable, (i.e in the case of the four bar mechanism the step increment for the driven link can be varied, as described in section 3.1.2). It is advantageous to keep different files for each component being measure on the mechanism to prevent the CAD window from becoming cluttered.
The software is simple to use due to its simple user interface, the inbuilt help files provide useful descriptions of the various functions of the software in a easily comprehendible manner. An advantage of the software is that the user does not need an in depth knowledge of mechanism analysis in order to perform a detailed analysis of the system. This means minimal amount of training is required.
The cost of purchasing and further training would be a major factor in the decision of which method to employ within the company.
The Force & Torque values from Working Model and Excel summarised in Table 4.1. It can be seen that the results vary greatly between the two methods, the free body diagrams derived for the first four bar linkage shown in Appendix 4 have been solved using matrix solutions. Although the resultant force data is deemed to be incorrect the theory has been applied correctly, therefore the errors must results from the transferring of theoretical equations into the spread sheet itself. Additional time spent debugging the separate sections to resolve these errors would produce a powerful mechanism analysis tool.
Having critically examined each method for the purpose of mechanism analysis it is the conclusion of this report that the most suitable method is the Excel spread sheet. Provided that the spread sheet is constructed correctly, thoroughly tested and proved to be correct, this is a very effective method.
This method meets all the requirements specified from the out set which were:
Good accuracy.
Easy to use.
Minimal training requirements - The spread sheet requires little previous engineering knowledge of mechanisms and only very minimal training in the use of Excel itself.
Cost effective - Most companies own the software as part of Microsoft office, however it can be purchased as a separate module for a small initial cost. No further charges would be necessary.
Quick mechanism analysis - Only the mechanism configuration needs to be entered into the configuration sheet in the workbook, from which a full and in-depth mechanism analysis is produced, all collected in the summary sheet of the workbook.
