Since the first formal deductive reasoning system - syllogistic logic invented by Aristotle in the 5 th century (Wikipedia), the artificial intelligence (AI) has been developing for a quite long time. Before the formal concept of AI was proposed, it was only a dream or even a myth in people 's life. Although AI has a strong science fiction connotation, it forms a crucial branch of computer science, which are dealing with intelligent behavior, learning and adaptation in machines.
Humanoid robot is one of the greatest inventions in the field of AI. It is a robot with its appearance based on the human body. Not just head, eyes, arms and legs as the old generation, the latest humanoid robots have mouth, neck, feet, and even hips, which make robots much agiler and become more like a human being. We also call the robots with humanoid feature as autonomous robots. They can adapt to change in their environment or themselves and continue to reach their goals. This is the main difference between humanoid robots and industrial robots.
Humanoid robot is capable of moving, recognizing, and memorizing. By doing those, in humanoid robotics, mapping, navigation, and the ability to learn to recognize and remember things about people it interacts with, are crucial to humanoid robot systems (Kortenkamp, 1998).
Levitt and Lawton (1990) posited three basic questions that define robot mapping and navigation:
Most of the humanoid robotics are focusing on one or more of these questions, and these robots use the spectrum of options for mapping and navigation.
On the side of the spectrum are completely metric maps. In these representations, the robot 's environment is defined by a single, global coordinate system in which all mapping and navigation takes place. Typically, the map is a grid with each cell of the grid representing some amount of space in the real world. Base on this, some robots use grid-based approach to mapping and navigation.
On the other side of the spectrum are qualitative maps, in which the robot 's environment is represented as places and connections between places. These maps contain no metric or geometric information, but only the notions of proximity and order. This idea makes the approach eliminate the inevitable problems of dealing with uncertain movement in robots. Qualitative maps can also be more compact in their representation of space, only represent interesting places and not the entire environment. Qualitative maps are very popular in humanoid robotics now.
The concept of robot mapping is fairly simple: the robot is to depict its world electronically by using its sonar sensors and the cameras devices. The mapping, it refers to the process of constructing a model of the environment based on sensor measurements, and artificial neural networks are used to interpret the sensor measurements. There are two typical elements which are quite important in the mapping. They are grid-based approach and topological approach. Grid-based approach represents environments by evenly-spaced grids. Each grid cell contains a value which indicates the presence or absence of an obstacle in the corresponding place. Topological approach represents robot environments as graphs. In graphs, there are nodes correspond to distinct places, and arcs represent adjacency. Not just grid-based and topological approach, sonar sensor interpretation, which measures approximate echo distances to nearby obstacles, and stereo camera interpretation, which provides images from special objects, are also combined in the mapping system.
In robots navigation, path planning and collision avoidance technologies are key factors in humanoid robotics. As mentioned in the mapping, the grid-based maps and topological maps are used in the mapping system, and they are the bases of robot navigation as well.
Path planning within the grid-based maps, the idea for this is to let the robot always move on a minimum-cost path to the goal, or the nearest goal, if multiple goals exist. The cost for traversing a grid cell is determined by its occupancy value. Path planning is also used in the topological maps. Compared to the grid-based maps, the enormous compactness of topological maps increases the efficiency of planning. These path planning are generally used in 1990s, and still being improved in order to be used in new generation robotics.
Obstacle avoidance is one of the goals of robot navigation. This is relatively easy using the mapping technique described above. Once the map is updated, the software which is used in the robot system, will determine the next move. And for obvious reasons, the collision avoidance must operate in real-time.
Individual recognition is a widely reported phenomenon in the world, the ability to recognize and remember individuals is crucial for complex interactions among social animals include human being. It is the key function while people communicate with others. In robots' world, humanoid robots must be able to recognize people and learn about various characteristics through embodied social interaction. Among these individual recognitions, face recognition in the humanoid robotics is widely being developed all the time.
In order to recognize and remember characteristics of various people, the robot must be able to identify people and link relative information, for instance, people 's past behavior, beliefs, habits, etc. A substantial amount of research has been carried out in person identification technology in the past 10 years (Nakajima, Pontil, 2000). Most of these works attempted to solve the identification problem which is like, given a set of labeled training data and test data, find the correct person label for the test data. In some of the face recognition systems, the training images are collected and labeled manually, which is not done by robot itself. The robot with humanoid features should be capable of collecting training data for learning, and directly perceive the environment on its own.
The basic idea for face recognition is, camera receives the visual and passes it as an input to the face detector system. Then face detector sends information regarding location of faces found within the robot 's visual range, if any, for further pre-processing. Based on the training set, the pre-processed image is then recognized to generate an initial hypothesis. After the recognition process, post-processing might be performed on the test image in order to either include unknown individuals or incrementally improve the existing training set (Aryananda, 2001).
There was a face recognition system created in artificial intelligence laboratory in MIT. It includes face detector, pre-processing and etc. Face detector, which is given periodic camera input, the face detector outputs the location of existing faces. By doing so, precise and speedy face detector is the key element in this system. Because of the variation in distance, viewing angle, and lighting factors in the environment, and since both camera and target move around, the face detector 's output is relatively noisy. In order to avoid these situations and get higher detection accuracy, the skin tone detector was used in the face recognition system. After being detected by face detector, each face image needs to be processed and be scaled to a specific pixel image. Each pixel in the image is normalized in order to alleviate lighting variations, which is mentioned in the face detector above. After this, each face image is masked by using 2D Gaussian to diminish background variations.
The artificial intelligence technology is being used in many fields in the world, especially in the humanoid robotics. The technologies of mapping, navigation and face recognition mentioned in this essay are just general knowledge. Beside these, mechanics, anatomy and etc, are also used in robotic system. They could be more specific if they are used in different types of robots with humanoid features. Like the humanoid robot ASIMO, which is created by Honda, it could only walked and did some simply work at the beginning. Few years ago, it started to walk faster than before at 3km/h and started to do more difficult tasks. The new generation of ASIMO, it is amazingly running at 6km/h and even being able to turn direction while running at 3km/h, and also be able to greet the people it learns and recognizes by itself. The technologies of mapping, navigation and face recognition used by Honda, SONY and etc, are developed very quickly in the recent years, and becoming more professional and perfect. More and more people believe that, humanoid robots will be part of people 's life and help people do things, which make human have more free time to enjoy their own life in the future.
