When Robert Venturi was invited to design The National Gallery Sainsbury Wing as part of the collaborative group; Venturi, Rauch and Scott Brown, he was globally famous and had well established, well justified, architectural theories and ideas.
Venturi was doubtlessly the best choice for the project in the eyes of the sensitive London selection committee. His proposal for the extension to the National Gallery was the summation and continuation of an idea first conceived on placement, as a student, in Rome in the mid 1950 's. A placement he won as an exceptional student at Princeton University. This idea, inspired by the eclectic contrasts of the Italian cities fa  ades which span hundreds of years of rich history, was one of consideration for existing architecture: Innovation of the old in connection with today, responsive to contemporary technology and techniques. A notion expressed clearly in the opening quote of this essay.
Robert Venturi was educated during the revolution in architecture of Le Corbusian inspired modernity. He is rare in that whilst his contemporaries were fashioning clean white designs in the style so publicly advocated by the Swiss architect he was choosing responsiveness to individual human needs and taking inspiration from the architecture of the past. Both he and Corbusier where well educated on architectural history - Venturi, being a student at Princeton, received more classical training than that offered at the other great American universities - but where Corbusier became disillusioned with styles of the past and felt the need to whitewash, to create a 'New Architecture', Venturi embraced the over complication and strict rules of old styles.
This is a clear trait of Venturi 's work, he never conformed to current fashions, recognising the need to rise above trends and maintain uniqueness in order to be individual. This of course meant his buildings were heavily criticised but this is a process he seemed to enjoy immensely. Through his buildings he is critical of current architecture, always endeavouring to create an appropriate architecture of the time, he delights in the controversy they attract. When it came to designing this new section of the National Gallery in London Venturi was hardened to criticism and stubbornly confident. He was using a design ideal he'd been perfecting and advocating for more than thirty five years. As with all his projects he aimed to be considerate of the existing styles with themes from the locality whilst really thoroughly addressing the brief and bringing a new complexity to the overall aesthetic.
It was from Venturi 's repertoire of designs and studies that The Sainsbury Wing began to evolve. The brief was detailed and well established, several teams having been employed purely to research and develop the needs of a building very much in the public eye. It is evident from past projects that Venturi responded to briefs in a detailed and complete way whilst maintaining avant-garde design. This combined with the sensitive nature of the proposal was what led the committee to choose his design over those of the other five short listed entries.
Venturi describes the origins of his ideas for the project as coming from a 'penumbra' of undefined inspirational sources in his mind. His ideas for the fa  ade coming quickly whilst his intentions for the internal structure evolved from careful analysis of the way the space was to be used on a personal level. This interest in public and personal perceptions of buildings is a residue from a major project Venturi undertook with his wife and partner Denise Scott Brown. The project, which resulted in the book Learning From Las Vagas, researched thoroughly the position of signage and exterior in architecture. It challenged the general consensus that a development like Las Vagas with its audacious casinos was vulgar. Rather that it was in fact embracing the complexity that arose from the need to attract the consumer and that the overall effect was more satisfactory than imposed order.
He and Scott Brown introduced the 'Duck or Decorated Shed' theory in this book. 'Ducks' being buildings where the outside need of a building to communicate is greater than what they contain, whereas 'Decorated Sheds' utilise the exterior as a means of communication without distorting the interior. Venturi understood the need to communicate publicly the renaissance art contained within a gallery that also responded to an individuals use of the space it contained, a 'Decorated Shed'.
A major origin for the design came from the fascination Venturi had with the history of the site. He talks of the layered past as if it were almost tangible, this was obviously an attraction of the project for him. Even in his Princeton days it seems he was drawn to the relatively recent history of his surroundings, later returning to the campus to erect an Elizabethan pastiche of a building responsive to the surrounding architecture. He mentions both Lutyens and Wren as inspiration for the way they applied their plans within awkward, sometimes medieval, sites, giving the impression of classical order over what is often quite a distorted location. Both of these prolific architects London works significantly influenced the classical style of the fa  ade.
As part of his explorations for the interior of the gallery a trip to Italy for all the architects and the client group was arranged. Much of the art collection to be displayed within the space was early renaissance, in particular early Italian, and it was considered necessary that similar work should be seen displayed in the Italian tradition. Whilst all agreed it was important not to recreate renaissance Italy like a stage set, the way the Italian buildings made use of clerestories for their high shafts of natural light and the solid use of natural materials; which gave a sturdy inflexible feeling quite unlike contemporary galleries, where all used for the interior display spaces. Both Italian Renaissance, and its British imitation style classicism, where major influences on this design.
This response to surrounding styles is typical of many of Venturi 's projects where much older significant buildings are either adjacent or local. In his design for an addition to the Allen Memorial Art Museum Venturi butts a modern geometric block against the side of the building. The design is softened by harmonising colour repetition on the facades of both the old and new sections and the rigidity of the modern extension is broken by windows seemingly randomly placed. These windows are actually a response to the practical use of the internal space and are typical of Venturi 's signature style whereby the symmetry is broken by the prioritisation of personal use of the building over public perception. Overall the balance of internal needs and external harmony make for a successful fusion of a building, a result Venturi also achieved with the Sainsbury Wing.
An element of bold fun is evident in much of Venturi 's work. Practical quirks and the use of chunky oversize fittings in smaller projects to avoid busyness make for playful spaces. To incorporate this element into the National Gallery project Venturi has taken the typical classical pillars from the main building and jumbled and flattened them together in his addition, combining illusion and pastiche. Surrounding the main entrance to the wing it seems an attempt to reduce the austerity of the gallery at the earliest stage and promises more eccentricity within. Visitors are than compelled to climb to the top of the building by ascending a vast well lit stair beneath semicircular arches of increasing depth; thus achieving false perspective.
Within the display rooms the semicircular arch is repeated above every door utilising stone and colonnades in reference to the renaissance architecture and art within. More false perspective and frames are used to direct the eye to significant works and spaces are set in distorted rows in response to the shape of the site and the views from the unmoving existing gallery. In the same way picturesque gardens were engineered by 'Capability' Brown to give pleasing vistas of imposed beauty Venturi Shapes his display spaces around the art to emphasise the gallery experience.
Careful use of lanterns above the spaces has allowed all the rooms to be lit by controlled 'live' daylight and windows have been positioned to allow glimpses of the art on the approach and selected views of surrounding London. The quality of the space is proof of the necessity of a firm grounding in research. The stability necessary for the display of renaissance art has been achieved in rooms that, whilst flexible, are not Spartan.
Venturi has always quietly advocated his theories on architecture. Whilst his book Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture was hailed as "...the most important writing on the making of architecture since Le Corbusier 's Vers Une Architecture..." (Scully 1966, p. 9) it 's impact caused ripples rather than waves. He has been true to the theories expressed throughout his whole career which has spanned the gradual transitional evolution from modern to post-modern to contemporary. Whilst other architects were turning their buildings inside out in celebration of new technology Venturi was simply applying it in improvements to the way people live on both a personal and public scale.
Designs submitted for the 'Sainsbury Wing' project by Richard Rogers repeated closely the high-tech style of the Pompidou centre and Lloyd Building. Quite the reverse of the use of the vernacular this proposal does away with the fa  ade in favour of steel and glass. The structure would house an anonymously adaptable space for the art to be displayed. This design is totally in contrast to the locality and whilst Venturi agrees than diversity improves the urban aesthetic it lacks the specific sensitivity to the brief his winning design achieves. This high-tech design is typical of the post modern work Venturi has been in competition with and next to it it 's clear to see that Venturi 's message of understatement is boldly controversial.
So many architects have produced work in a specific, fashionable style which retrospectively seems a failure that Venturi 's careful theories seem a positive alternative. His buildings have aged well and elements of them that were innovative have become the norm. An ability to be so in-touch with the now that he need only extract those elements he knows will work, and combining them with the familiar, has served Venturi well.
Venturi has challenged the expectations of what a new art gallery has to be. By creating a space totally responsive to the needs of the art, and the viewer 's relationship with it, he has proved that display space need not be entirely neutral. It can even contain views of external surroundings without distracting from what is within. Venturi brings to the location a complexity through both contradiction and assimilation which subtly improves the overall aesthetic of the site and still provides contemporary art space meeting the needs of the brief.
