Of the available questions, I have chosen question 2, which asks me to what extent the knowledge and skills I acquire in the study of one or both of my subject fields makes a contribution to human development. My first field of study is Japanese Language and Contemporary Culture, the second is Philosophy. I will concentrate on Language. I believe that the knowledge and skills I acquire will make a considerable development to my life as a human, but I am unable to say whether what I acquire during my study will affect human development as a whole. I will address the occurances in a human life, and distinguish what kinds of changes these are, obviously learning being one of them. Following this, suggestions as to what makes a good human life will be brought up. Finally, how the knowledge and skills I acquire contribute to my development as a human, will be criticized.
If I consider certain occurances throughout the stages of my life, there are many changes that have happened and made me what I am today, whatever that may be. Obviously, I have been born and for over 21 years I have gradually grown from being a small child to being what looks like a physically functional human adult male. Thus far I have gained the ability to walk, talk and acquired the knowledge of how to survive on my own. I have also experienced many things inbetween, like having attended a live performance or two, having participated in a national schooling system (and subsequently, an international one), which, amongst other things, honed my ability to speak English as well as Dutch. I could go on, but the mentioned occurances; palpable changes, should suffice to be catagorised into certain catagories around development. Being a product of evolution, I would say that being conceived can count as a substantial change, and being unaware of the way of death, I might return to the earth when I die becoming, within time, some kind of fertiliser for soil. I was not and will not be, assuming the latter, as I am now; recognisable as a human. Attending concerts, has not really affected me in any significant way. They might have been inspiring, entertaining, exciting, etc. but they have left me the same as I was before I attended the concert thus falling under the category of being accidental changes. Gaining the ability to walk, to speak a language and now being able to feed myself and effectively live a little longer until I do so next time, are much less noticable in terms of both the physical and mental than substantial changes. Contrarily, these changes are a lot more substantial than accidental changes, as I certainly have remained recognisably the same, but these changes have contributed to my development as a human being. I have learned, and for the benefit of what one day will be an ending result; something recognisable as a fully functioning, adult human being.
A 'good human life' assumes a lot. Above all, it is subjective, because what might be considered a good human life to one person could very well be a very mediocre human life to another. It really depends on where a person 's standards lie, but there could be suggestions to what makes a human life good that are not specific enough to rule out some people. There should be suggestions that apply broadly enough to the majority to be considered ingredients to a good human life. The following suggestions are, arguably, some things that could make a human life good. Favourable and sustained relationships with the people in one 's life, such as their family and friends. This assumes that one has family and friends, but a good relationship with these people, or any other people for that matter, ensures much emotional stability. A sufficient understanding of one 's place in the world might offer inspiration as to which direction one would feel comfortable following. For one to have control over the affairs in one 's life delivers a sense of satisfaction as it is a stage which has surpassed the majority of existentialist questions. A reasonable amount of leisure in one 's life is healthy in that it provides encouragement to continue living, however, the responsibilities would be best being paid attention to. The attaining of skills, or rather attaining a sense of being skilled in some area, can be very satisfying, ofcourse, this requires one to learn these skills, which brings me to that very kind of development; learning.
Learning plays a large role in one 's life. I doubt that it is possible for any functional human being who has ever lived to have not learned a thing throughout their lives. Much of learning is down to discovery, in which case it is an unplanned development, which is what kind of a change in a life learning is; a development. Learning, however, is not only mere discovery, but a search. Humanity has established learning institutions because it is human nature to seek knowledge. Philosophically, learning is defined as the process of knowing something and, thereafter, understanding something that one had no prior knowledge and understanding of. Learning is steadfast, unlike beliefs and opinions, which can very often be false. Using application to my first field of study, which is Japanese Language and Contemporary Culture, I will try to explain what the conventional theories behind knowledge and understanding are, so I can argue why I feel this field of study can contribute to my development as a human being.
Knowledge (of the propositional p kind), initially, has what is called a tripartite definition, which means that there are three parts to that definition. The first part of something to be considered knowledge; p must be true. Language in itself is a kind of truth. There are general rules to sentence structures, grammar, etc. and certain words mean certain things. There are, as with all languages, exceptions to rules, but those exceptions are still knowable; they are established. The second part of the tripartite definition of knowledge is that the subject believes p. It has been argued that belief in a proposition is not enough for all of a knowledge claim to be exactly that; a knowledge claim. The argument was that a belief in p is insufficient and that absolute certainty is required, because one might be less ready to put forth a knowledge claim if one is less than certain of the claim; one can still believe p with p being false. However, certainty replacing belief is an quarrelsome argument that does not suffieciently justify why it should happen. The third of the tripartite definition is argued somewhat more. Initially, a subject must be able to justify p. I can justify, thus far even, that the knowledge of the language I attain is true, simply by communicating with a native speaker of the language. However, there have been suggestions that would imply that the third part of the tripartite definition is volatile; that it needs to be something else. Some say that if the subject has come by p through a reliable source, then that will suffice. In that case, I consider an established educational institution to be a reliable source. Another option is that p causes one 's belief in p, so if p was untrue one would not possibly believe p.
Ultimately, something needs to be true in order for it to be a knowledge claim. Understanding is a different story though. Propositional knowledge is already a prerequisite for understanding. Practical knowledge would complete understanding, because with practical knowledge, one would be able to explain p. One should be able to explain a proposition, which would imply knowing the proposition, and its nature in order to sufficiently be accepted as having an understanding of the proposition. I can know how to speak a language or know facts about the language 's country of origin, but I can not understand the aspects of both if I am unable to explain why these aspects are the way they are. Still, acquiring the language I am currently attempting to acquire will result in me being able communicate more broadly, and I therefore consider it a significant development. I expect to understand it as well, and this opens up a door for being able to assist in the development of someone else, should they choose to accept my knowledge as justified, true belief. Thus, I will be feeding one of the suggestions that one would require to lead a good human life; maintaining healthy relationships with one 's acquaintances, friends, family, etc.. The knowledge and skills I acquire in my fields of study will contribute greatly to my development as a human being. That same knowledge, however, has the potential to contribute to the development of other people. The same can be said of them, that their knowledge and skills will contribute to my development. This kind of 'mentor and apprentice' concept seems like a mass mutual contribution to human development.
