Modernist literature is 'reckoned to be the art of what Harold Rosenburg calls 'the tradition of the new'' and is based around the idea of experimentation, linguistic innovation and the exploration of complex and original ideas. In Europe the avant-garde, as Modernism was first named, of literature expressed chaos, dysfunction, and a negative, depressing mind frame. Literature written in the Modernist style shares many characteristics and concepts. The writers of the Modernist movement share ideas through their literature and use certain techniques to create the desired effect as will be analysed later on in the essay. Formal and thematic characteristics that work in unison in pieces of modernist literature will be discussed.
P. Childs, Modernism, the New Critical Idiom, (Routledge Taylor & Francis Group, London, 2000), p. 1.
Modernist literature stems from the Modernist movement, which is said to have begun with French Symbolism in the mid-nineteenth century and the collapse of naturalism, a French movement in which writers refused to idealise experience and paid close attention to detail and accuracy, creating a representation of 'true' reality.
Modernism is also known as the second generation of  'symbolisme'. Writers of the literature of both movements used words and phrases accurately chosen for an intensifying effect and there was a strong belief of the symbolic nature of language. The  'symbolists' such as Arthur Rimbaud, St  phane Mallarm  , Paul Val  ry and Charles Baudelaire believed in indirect expression of dreams and inspiration. Modernism as a movement followed after romanticism. An essential principle in literature of Modernism is that imagination is a separate object, an idea also conveyed in romanticism. However, in Modernism, imagination was seen as being separate from the world set in the writing and the language itself, in contrast to the ideas behind romanticism which suggest the means of expression conveys the subject and world of that subject, the language rather than true expression is used as a means of description rather than a representation of thought.
Modernism is 'characterized by radical experiments with aesthetic time and space and a revolt against 19th-century realism'. The work of realist writers was seen as outdated encouraging Modernist artists to re-examine essential features of life including religion, philosophy, literature, music, culture and art. Modernist literature is often seen as working against the style of the realist works by writers such as Jane Austen and Charles Dickens and it breaks away from traditional genre and form.
Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia, Modernist literature, ,   last accessed on 08/05/2006.
Modernist prose is greatly compressed, written in a new experimental and intense style of writing using complex time frames and ideas of consciousness. The prose by modernist authors is so complex it requires the reader 's full concentration as if close-reading a piece of poetry or philosophy.
Important names involved with modernism and specifically with modernist literature are Charles Baudelaire, Henry James, Gustave Flaubert, Fyodor Dostoevsky, Emile Zola, Franze Kafka, Marcel Proust. Writers of English modernist literature include Virginia Woolf, T.S. Eliot, James Joyce, D.H. Lawrence, Joseph Conrad and Ezra Pound.
Modernism became apparent in English-speaking cultures around 1910. There became an obvious shift from the neat linear plots and detailed characterisation of nineteenth century literature to literature based on myth, poetic images, and symbols. The First World War had a major affect on literature written in the countries involved. The devastating consequences and moral disaster of the War emphasised the cultural chaos and the breakdown and spiritual disintegration of individuals. This negative and depressing atmosphere was conveyed through pieces of literature, such as T.S. Eliot 's well-known poem 'The Waste Land'. The piece written conflicts with conventional narrative structure and reveals images, which seem unconnected and fragmented. The images used are fairly difficult to decode representing the idea of exclusive meanings and elitism, a common feature of modernist literature. The metaphor of vision is key to the poem, which is another essential idea in modernism.
Modernist writers were much more interested in the workings of the mind than in that of the body and worked at conveying mental images to the reader 's intelligence. 'Modernism in literature was characterised by a desire to open up unexplored ares of the mind, including the unconscious realms'. Psychological and philosophical elements are constantly apparent in modernist works. Modernist narrative aims to depart from the desires of the body and to express the mind fully. The writers of this movement tend to focus on small scale ideas rather than the large, such as the indivual in preference to society. In the writing of modernism there was a clear negativity, an almost depressing air conveyed by the intense combination of words and expressions. This contrasts sharply to Victorian literature of the nineteenth century and its display of optimism through characterisation, plot and language, an obvious distance from the mostly pessimistic modernist literature. A chief idea seen running through a good number of modernist fiction is the alienation of the individual of a restless mind and thoughts.
P. Collier and J. Davies, editors, Modernism and the European Unconscious, (Polity Press, Cambridge, 1990), on the back of front cover.
Scepticism towards the notion of truth is a recurring idea in modernism contrasting dramatically with the apparent attempt at revealing the truth in naturalist or realist writing, popular in the nineteenth century. Another characteristic seen in many modernist pieces is the dissatisfaction with contemporary life and the writers clear pessimistic attitude towards the modern world, which was commonly believed between them to be  'spiritually bankrupt' and 'culturally fragmented'.
P. Childs, Modernism, the New Critical Idiom, (Routledge Taylor & Francis Group, London, 2000), p. 4.
Other thematic characteristics involve the breakdown of social norms and tainting of apparent religious certainties. Modernist writers often detailed about lack of faith and the uncertainty of a 'Godless universe'.
Stream of consciousness is a chief idea in modernist literature and is used by many writers as an essential form of expression. The reader is plunged into the mind of the character and the feel of uncertainty and an unfamiliar world is felt due to the character 's own alienation, unlike familiar scenes captured in realist novels such as Jane Austen 's 'Emma'. These characters are often placed in an urban, dysfunctional society and cityscapes, which deeply affects the thoughts and mind of the individual.
Free verse or vers libre, is a common feature of the Modernist poetry, allowing the writer to express their thoughts in a more liberal and less-restrictive manner. Furthermore discontinuous narrative, juxtaposition, and unconventional use of language and images are chief characteristics of Modernist literature. As with the work of Baudelaire, shifts in rhythm and unusual changing of time order and sudden transitions are displayed in modernist works.
Additional key aspects of Modernist literature involve 'open form, a difficult or complex mental landscape, an unreliable narrator and psychological and linguistic repitition, obsession with language, deep introspection, and techinical and formal experimentation'.
Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia, Modernist literature, ,   last accessed on 08/05/2006.
A clear way to convey the chief characteristics of Modernist literature is to use an apt example to effectively highlight and analyse in a detailed fashion the way in which the style and techniques of Modernist writers work in conveying the ideas and concepts behind the Modernist movement. A key text that perfectly exemplifies modernist literature is the novel 'Mrs Dalloway' written by Virginia Woolf. 'Mrs Dalloway' a novel written in 1925 shortly after the end of the first World War fits exactly into the Modernist literary genre and appeared when Modernism had moved to England from the rest of Europe. It is a well-known example of expressionist and modernist writing. Woolf aimed to move away from traditional forms of fiction, to come 'closer to life,' to capture the moments of life, good and bad. Woolf uses a new literary form to effectively express the issues and consciousness of society of post-war England. Woolf, an influential writer, saw the conventional 'realist' novel as an inadequate form of expression, preferring to use her experimental style of writing about character 's disjointed impressions of the world around her and using stream of consciousness to great effect. There are no gaps or pauses only a continuous on running of the characters thoughts reflecting the true nature of the human mind, a key notion of the Modernist movement. The complex structure of thoughts and the mind is reflected by the complex structure of the novel. This idea of the complexity of the human mind and the complexity of life in general conveyed effectively through the loose structure of the plot supports the Modernist view of the inconclusive nature of life and the constant uncertainties that surround us. Woolf chose not to use chapters but divided her novel in unnamed parts and sections. An interesting point to note is the conventional unit of time in a Modernist novel is the day, represented in 'Mrs Dalloway' which follows the day of the character Clarissa Dalloway as she prepares for a party in her grand London home. It empahsises the intensity of experience and portrays the unusual time scheme dealt with in most Modernist works. Woolf juxtaposes present day thoughts with flash backs and memories and details of the past.
Considering themes dealt with in 'Mrs Dalloway' several clearly run parallel with modernist ideas and other pieces of Modernist literature. Isolation and alienation of the individual are key issues seen in this post-war novel:
V. Woolf, Mrs. Dalloway, (Second edition, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1998), p. 7.
This significant line from the novel emphasises the contrast between the chaos of public city life and the quiet privacy of the soul and the protagonist 's deep thoughts. Clarissa, even when she is walking through the crowded streets, considers the essential loneliness of life. This idea is another link to the modernist 's tendency to write about isolation and one 's distance from society.
Time and psychology, significant aspects to this novel, are of great interest to modernist writers as mentioned above. Whilst writing 'Mrs Dalloway', Woolf was reading literature by writers such as James Joyce and Marcel Proust, huge figures in the modernist movement, their influence apparent. 'Mrs Dalloway' attempts to uncover the fragmented thoughts of the characters. Characters dealt with in modernist literature are often thought- tormented, suffering individuals, as seen in Woolf 's novel with Clarissa and Septimus in particular. She shows the characters' ever-changing thoughts and how they think and reflect as they move through space revealing their reactions to their surroundings. The unstatic nature of the human mind portrayed here clearly relates to the Modernist writer' s conventional use of stream of consciousness and capturing life in moments of vision. Woolf wanted to give her characters 'humanity', 'humour' and 'depth', defining them through action and choice. The Modernist principle of the importance of the mind over the body is obviously portayed in this novel by the merging of thoughts of the characters and complete focus on the conscious. Each character is never stable but is more like a repertoire of personas rather than a solid individual.
The narrotor in 'Mrs Dalloway' supplies minimal report supporting the modernist literature 's use of unreliable narrators and the concept of truth is questioned, contrasting to the realist novel 's unquestionable narrotor and notion of truth and reality. In this novel truths are subjective and changeable, as the plot streams back and forth in space and time. 'Mrs Dalloway' reveals the effects of the war and portrays the nature of the society, which was left in its wake and how the individual was affected by the vast tragedy that was World War One.
As can be seen 'Mrs Dalloway' is a key example of the Modernist novel and displays the chief characterisitcs of Modernist literature, encompassing the main themes and techniques.
As we have just seen in the Modernist style in prose, Modernist poetry is also technically innovative. Free verse is mainly used to enhance expression and the mental depth of the poems.
P. Collier and J. Davies, editors, Modernism and the European Unconscious, (Polity Press, Cambridge, 1990), p. 32.
The Modernist image in poetry is of a fragmented and isolated nature, where the image of the creative poet relates to the notion of the 'unconscious'.The image used in Modernist pieces of literature represents the imagination rather than to convey symbolic meaning. A single image is often used in Modernist poetry rather than a compilation of images as Ezra Pound expresses; 'It is better to present one Image in a lifetime than to produce voluminous works'. The language written in such an open form can appear chaotic but the focus is on the flow of the language and the spatial awareness on the page. The isolated image is the 'most characteristic feature of Modernist poetry'. The Modernist belief is that language cannot be trusted as it is unable to directly describe things only hinting at a world seen in the mind. The poem acts visually on the page and the language and spacial structure reveal a deeper level behind the literature and link heavily to psycho-analysis.
P. Collier and J. Davies, editors, Modernism and the European Unconscious, (Polity Press, Cambridge, 1990), p. 18.
The lack of authority from a narrator works in Modernist writing to open up questions and possible ideas in the mind of the reader and to relate to the unconscious. Not only does the writing convey a meaning, it allows the reader to think of his own personal reaction to the piece and think of ideas from observing the open form, free-thinking text.
As can be seen there are many characteristics of Modernist writing including poetry and prose, which have been discussed above. The important movement began in mid-nineteenth century France and influenced many writers in its path through Europe to England. Modernist literature, a rebellion against realism and rationalism, focused on the idea of expression and the concept and thought process of the mind using many different techniques for different effects. The psychological work of Sigmund Freud hugely affected the writings in Modernist literature as can be seen through the recurrent themes of time and psychology, and the obsession with language and the true expression of thoughts. Using Mrs Dalloway as an example above, the chief characteristics of Modernist literature can be seen more clearly.
