.
The term 'post-modern' is broadly used but very difficult to define, perhaps because it is the term with which society, art and culture today is most commonly linked to. In this instance, however, post-modern is used to describe the poetry produced after the modernist era and post world war two. Poetry at this time in America was particularly diverse, with poets trying to move away from or develop the conventions of the poetic past.
There were many groups of poets who emerged after the Second World War, and these groups all experimented with different methods in their own ways. The three major groups were, firstly, the Beat Generation (poets who used 'urban' vocabulary and performed their poetry almost as music with a spiritual influence) with people such as Lawrence Ferlinghetti and Allen Ginsberg. Secondly, the Black Mountain School (interested in the speech of poetry the formal structures which effected it), including Charles Olsen, Robert Creeley and Denis Levertov. There was also another hugely influentail group named the New York Poets who actcively tried to go against the poetic traditions which dominated poetry before the 1950s as well as experimenting with the language of poetry.
Frank O'Hara with his essay Personism: A Manifesto is considered to have been the figurehead of the New York Poets (or Language Poets as they were also known). He joined forces John Ashberry and Kenneth Koch when they met in university and began a revolt against the old conventions and attempted to construct 'new concepts pf the poem' 1. 1 D. M. Allen the New American Poetry, Groves Press INC 1960.
I have decided to concentrate on the New York School Poety and what emerged from the inspiration they gave because of the interesting and innovative ways of using language to express meaning, to give form aesthetically and emphasis the zeitgeist at a time when society was undergoing great change and the poets themselves knew the importance of language in popular culture and the avant-garde.
The New York School was the one most commonly associated with the avant-garde and as they especially took influence from France, the surrealist art, and the political ideas they are particularly interesting as they did not attempt to be inclusive to developing an American poetic voice, but one of an empire of poetry from America to Europe. Ironically, though, they were also trying to make poetry more personal and make it a piece from the writer to the subject and almost excluded the wider reader. At the time and thereafter it has been argued that poetry as a literary form is dying because it "has become the most private, least accessible of the arts" 2. It could be argued that as these New York poets tried to bridge the gap between America and Europe, and experiment artistically they were also responsible for the decline of poetry. 2 M. Perloff RADICAL ARTIFICE: Writing Poetry in the Age of Media University of Chicago Press 1994.
I have chosen Frank O'Hara to open this anthology with two of his poems The Old Lady Died and Meditations in an Emergency. These poems both exemplify what O'Hara said he was trying to do and how he adapted his own style:
I do n't even like rhythm, assonance, all that stuff.
You just go on your nerve... But how can you really care if anybody gets it, or gets what it means, or if it improves them. Improves them for what? for death? Why hurry them along?.
