Education within the field of architecture is underpinned both by academic and practical work. This essay should try to summarise the experience that I gained whilst being a part of professional team(s). I will try to identify the issues related to running a "design business" within current socio-economic climate that I have encountered. Also, my aim is to address the skills that I have obtained during the time that I spent working in practice.
The following description and analysis is split into two parts. The first section concentrates on looking at architectural office as a business venture; trying to recognise and discuss the issues that I have encountered within the categories of practice management, design development and workspace culture.
The second section looks into specific skills that I have learnt through the involvement in a number of projects. It will try to show how certain knowledge about different stages of job running is the result of cumulative experience. In other words, how similarities and divergences of projects that went through the same stages of development process have helped me to gain a particular skill.
Since finishing my undergraduate degree, I have been involved with two design companies. Between August 2003 and December 2003, I was an intern at Thomas Heatherwick Studio in London. After my internship programme was finished, I have taken up a position of an architectural assistant at White Design Associates in Bristol, where I stayed until December 2004. It is through these two organisations that I became exposed to realities of running a professional practice.
Within this section I will briefly explain the background of these two practices. Following on, I will try to analyse their organisational structure and practice management strategies. Finally, by comparing and contrasting these two organisations I will try to reach conclusions regarding the issues that I became aware of and that relate to running a professional business.
White Design Associates was formed in 1998. For the company founders Craig White and Linda Farrow, the delivery of sustainable building design was the key interest and the cornerstone of their business strategy. Trying to depart from tokenistic and reactive approach to sustainable design, the company has set out clear objectives embodied in the company policies that emphasised:
Minimising energy consumption in all of the stages of development process; (specifying materials that do not consume high amounts of energy for their production, using materials that are produced close to the location of development, reducing energy consumption in buildings during the occupancy period, creating post occupancy strategy).
The use of materials which resources can be sustained; (use of wood and straw as a resource that can be sufficiently managed, avoidance of using metal or petrol by-products).
Delivery of quality design that is market competitive; (creating innovative design solutions that can compete with more standard methods of construction preferred by the industry).
Key projects that have attracted the interest of wider public and that were more challenging to deliver than others were: VELUX headquarters in Kettering (completed in 2000), University of the West of England Architecture School (completed in 2002) and Kingsmead primary school (completed in 2004).
Thomas Heatherwick Studio was set up approximately 12 years ago when its director completed the masters programme at Royal College of Art. Since then, the studio has employed a number of people with professional background in art, design and architecture. The work output of the company spans the fields of art installation, product design and architecture. The practice did not have written objectives that would have been its driving force. However, the common threads existed that could be seen within to most of the projects. These were:
Recent projects that the studio has finished and that can be seen as an example of its output are: B of the Bang sculpture in Manchester (completed in 2004) and Paddington Basin rolling bridge (completed in 2004).
Organisational structure, for the purpose of this essay, implies:
At the time when I was working for them, both offices were very similar in size. White Design had grown from a company with four employees to one that has seven members of staff. On the other hand, in the period between August and December 2003, Thomas Heatherwick studio numbered a core team consisting of seven people and up to three interns that were working for the studio between three to six months each.
Both practices were similar in trying to break away from hierarchical division of tasks, whereby people would form pyramidal system of office organisation. This set up can be described as a structure within which people at the top would have overview of "live" projects, would engage in strategic decision making and design development, whilst the lower tiers of the structure would engage only in execution of particular tasks. Granted, these offices did not have the critical mass of people so that this type of company set up can be properly implemented.
However, they were actively trying to engage in operating in a fairly transparent way so that all of the employees could both understand and, to a certain degree, engage in company development. Also, this ensured that everybody is aware of the immediate responsibilities and priorities that a company has. In practice, this was implemented through weekly office meetings that both businesses used to organise. All members of staff would be present within these meetings and the following items would have been discussed:
Yet, this does not imply that every member of staff was equally engaged in all of the tasks. Certain job profiles can be differentiated. They best describe the nature and the scope of work that in most circumstances are undertaken by an individual working for either of the design ventures.
In both cases the company founders had best fitted this job description. Usually, they had a managerial role overseeing all of the projects the business was working on, engaging in company finance and raising company profile. In terms of day to day activities this meant that directors would have frequent meetings with project leaders, a weekly meeting with the office accountant and would serve as a forefront of the business. The latter activity encompassed:
However, the directors both within White Design Associates and Thomas Heatherwick studio would occasionally engage in a particular project if:
Even though there are a lot of similarities between the activities of company directors of both places where I had been working, there were some divergences too. Namely, within Thomas Heatherwick studio there were other job profiles that complemented and supported the activities of the director such as office administrator and company marketing assistant.
On the other hand White Design Associates did not have these job positions and much of the administrative and marketing work has been done or overseen by one of the directors.
A person who has been working within the practice the longest would have taken up this role. He (in both practices this position was taken up by a man) would usually manage a particular project himself. At the same time, he would also serve as a support for project architects giving them advise or providing them with help related to running a job. This is because a projects manager had the most insight into the way building industry operates and the way that company preferred to deliver projects. Apart from running a particular job himself, his role within White Design Associates or Thomas Heatherwick Studio was to:
There were not major differences between the activities of people who fitted this job profile in White Design Associates and Thomas Heatherwick Studio.
Project architect or project designer (the title used at Thomas Heatherwick Studio) would be the person in charge of running one or several projects from the early stages up to their completion. They would be engaged in usual activities that relate to the stages of development process from developing design options up to hand over of the finished project.
Within White Design Associates, people undertaking this job had a high degree of independence in terms that the input of directors or projects manger would be limited to the very initial stages of the process. Only if the project was facing difficulties or if project architect felt that he or she needed advice or help from senior team members would they get involved.
On the other hand, due to different approach to design process at Thomas Heatherwick Studio, project designers had, to an extent a lesser degree of independent decision making. Because company director had developed personal approach to design, the project could change or shift due to director 's changing attitude towards the project.
Within both practices, project architects and designers would also be involved in some administrative work, such as preparing bid submissions.
This job description best fitted the work that I had been undertaking. Within the offices that I worked for the responsibilities and tasks varied significantly.
Within White Design Associates, an architectural assistant would usually be allocated to one project architect. Together they would form a team and work on delivery of a single project, with project architect having a senior role. However, the assistant would be exposed to all stages of building development either directly as a participant in the workload, or indirectly by observing the tasks that project architect is undertaking. Coupled with that, this job position would usually include a responsibility for a smaller - scale development that the office is engaged with. In this situation the assistant would implement the knowledge gained through the collaboration with project architect and to an extent, act as a project architect himself. This process would be overseen and guided by company director. In personal case, I have been allocated a development of a 50m2 artist studio building. Architectural assistant would also act as a support member of staff carrying out administrative tasks and sharing the workload with other project architects.
In the case of Thomas Heatherwick Studio, due to limited time that an intern spends at the studio (three to six months) the investment in individual development cannot be carried out to such an extent. Usually, a person is also allocated to a project designer. However, because of a small time period that he or she is going to be spending with the office, an intern is rarely involved with a single project from beginning until its completion. Therefore, he or she is more likely to take up a general support role within the office.
This job positions existed in Thomas Heatherwick Studio, whilst the crux of this type of work has been divided between one company director and most members of staff working for White Design Associates.
The activities of these two job positions include:
This section of text focuses on the approach each of the offices had toward different activities that were undertaken by them. Crudely, they can be divided into the following segments:
Design development process can be defined as a period of time spent between the moment a client appoints the office to undertake certain project until the point the preferred design solution has been submitted to Development Control. At this stage of process, the following items would be agreed with a client:
The way in which the design options would have been developed within the practices that I had been working for was significantly different.
White Design Associates tended to reduce this period to a minimum. In other words, the initial options would be developed within several weeks. This could have been achieved because the practice championed a limited number of construction methods (structural solutions). This allowed the office to gain a significant expertise regarding them and quickly offer a design that it felt would not have inherent structural problems. Similarly, by being familiar with particular method of building, the company could have much clearer idea of the time needed for construction. Coupled with that, the company worked with structural and service engineers from the very outset of the project. This meant that client would from the very beginning have a design solutions that demonstrate that they can easily be built and that can be comprehensively costed.
On the other hand, Thomas Heatherwick studio had more incremental approach to design development. Various solutions would be narrowed down to a preferred one that would develop in detail as the development process progressed. This is partially due to the practice 's engagement in other types of design, such as art installations, public art and exhibition design. Because of relative simplicity of process of development within these avenues in comparison to building development, more freedom can be given to design solutions. This has resulted in practice implementing this approach when it came to the development of buildings. Final solution would usually be chosen from a number of proposals that were radically different from one another. As the result, there would be less certainty, particularly within the domain of building cost and building programme, in comparison to White Design Associates. Yet, practice collaborated with structural engineering firm, which meant that the design would be structurally resolved.
Again, both offices were different in terms of the strategy they developed for acquiring new work and in terms of the segment of market they were trying to appeal to. On one hand, whilst I had been working within these organisations, both companies had private and public sector clients. On the other hand, these sectors did not equally contribute to the income of the companies. White Design Associated had generated up to 80% of its income from public sector projects, namely two school developments. Thomas Heatherwick studio was earning most of its income from projects undertaken by private developers or trusts.
As the result, White Design Associates concentrated on obtaining new work through entering design competitions, tendering for positions of approved consultants with local authorities or public sector organisations and submitting OJEU tenders for large scale developments that were publicly funded.
Thomas Heatherwick Studio did venture into these activities, too. However, it had concentrated its efforts from getting new commissions in another way. As the practice was London based, it was more geared towards establishing links with various cultural institutions (museums, galleries, foundations) that were based in the city. Apart from having tangible resources to finance projects themselves, these organisations can serve as a platform for establishing link between design/art industry and potential clients.
Also, company director had dedicated a lot of time for public promotions such as media exposure and lectures. The marketing assistant who was pro actively engaging with various media organisations and public forms supported these activities.
Companies that I had been working for had an awareness of the need to pitch their services in a certain way. This meant that both offered a particular type of product.
White Design Associates developed Re-Thinking Space as a product. Collaborating with developers Willmott Dixon and VELUX window manufacturing company, they were offering a "building package" (named Re-Thinking Space); whereby client would be purchasing a system solution with pre determined building components and environmental systems. The solution would be adapted to particular needs and would be based on timber clad, glue laminated frame structure that is well insulated and naturally ventilated. In this way, White Design 's architectural solution was set against standard development market. It was, in a way, subverting the methods used by major developers whereby the standardised solutions are marketed as a guarantee of financial viability and "buildability" of a particular scheme. Hereby, White Design was instilling confidence in potential clients by showing that it can deliver design that has within itself integrated certain qualities (minimally processed materials, natural lighting and ventilation, minimal heat loss and energy savings) that can be delivered without having an impact on the project budget.
Whilst White Design concentrated on publicly promoting their innovation through building industry, Thomas Heatherwick Studio was keen to show its work in a different light. It was promoting the diversity of design solutions (SEE APPENDIX 1). In other words it was explaining its output as a series of diverse and unique projects that are linked by invention in engineering and materials. Therefore, the studio was offering its products as exclusive individual design pieces.
This strategy is probably less pre meditated one, but it is probably more of a by - product of the others previously mentioned. White Design Associates due to its design approach and the way it marketed its products had strong links within the construction industry. Apart from the partnership links through Re-thinking Space programme, the company was having a close links with a structural engineering and an environmental services engineering company whose members of staff would become a design team members from the beginning of a project.
Likewise, Thomas Heatherwick Studio had a dedicated member of staff from a structural engineering company that was contributing to design development on most of the projects. However, apart from this link, studio was more turned to forging links within cultural institutions, furniture/product design companies and other design professionals.
White Design Associates paid particular attention about the quality and the way the information is produced. Therefore, it had standardised system of drawing referencing related to stages of project, level of detail and building component. Equally, written work such as tender submissions, reports, faxes and electronic mail had standardised templates and filing system used by all members of staff. In this way the output produced by the office was not only uniform in terms of quality but it also had a particular and recognisable ("corporate") style. Also it ensured that each employee could be engaged in a piece of work at any stage of its development.
On the other hand, Thomas Heatherwick Studio had developed an information storage system both in terms of hard copies and electronic copies (central computer server) that was similar to the one of White Design Associates. However, they did not develop templates and the system of referencing/cross - referencing of information to the extent that the other practice did.
I will try to draw out conclusions I have reached about the factors that contribute to successfully running an architectural or a design practice. These conclusions are by no means definite and comprehensive, because I have drawn them from personal and limited experience. Predominantly, I have reached them by observing the way the practices I worked for had been organised and by observing various strategies they had employed, which I had touched upon in the previous paragraphs. From this analysis I have tried to extract some issues and themes that I thought were important to bear in mind when thinking about architecture as business venture in current cultural context.
Within next paragraphs, I hope to elaborate on the following themes I became aware of:
Whilst working at White Design Associates and Thomas Heatherwick studio, I gradually became aware of how design approach and client base are strongly related. In other words, the type of product or service that a company is offering is likely to be appealing to a certain sections of market. Therefore, it is likely that a company is going to get increasingly engaged with a specific type of demands. As the result, the company is going to adjust its activities and its strategies towards meeting that demand. Diagram 1 shows how previously mentioned company strategies have resulted from this dialogue between design approach and client base, in the case of White Design Associates and Thomas Heatherwick Studio.
Standardised solutions and strong environmental ethos of White Design particularly resonated with local authorities and organisations that themselves were involved in sustainable production or environmental protection. They would be more interested in buildings that were the example of good (sustainable) building practices than in other aspects of building design. As the result, the office concentrated on developing and researching building methods such as glue laminated structures or prefabricated straw bale panels. Equally, it was occupied with developing a database of environmentally friendly building products and materials. On the other hand, it meant it was less interested in other building technologies, particularly the ones related to steel frame systems or glazed envelopes. Similarly, other design themes such as physical context or the analysis of the locality of a development were having somewhat lesser importance.
Thomas Heatherwick Studio 's output seemed to attract either cultural or commercial establishments. As designs would usually have very strong formal qualities and uniqueness both in form and in materials, they would attract clients who wanted strong and powerful (iconic) solutions. In my personal opinion, the studio 's output was corresponding to the branding strategies of various organisations. Therefore the practice paid particular attention to formal research and the use of materials in an innovative way. However, this also meant that some practical design issues, such as accessibility or environmental and servicing solutions, would be sometimes overlooked.
This is not to say that the practices were only having these types of commissions and these types of design responses. However, the crux of their workload corresponded to the above mentioned patterns. In any case, I believe that, in a sense, these practices were responding to and anticipating the client base successfully through their activities. I think that it is increasingly important to understand the practice - client base co-relation, particularly in the case of emerging businesses. Any new architectural company should from the outset offer service which is in a way specific and which will differentiate it from other market competitors. More importantly, the practice should also have a clear idea about who is their target audience, as well.
By observing relationship between resources put into bid submissions and their outcomes I became aware of this issue. Namely, at White Design Associates I have been involved in compiling a number of tender bids (expressions of interest, OJEU submissions) over a period of one year. These bids would take usually several days to be produced by at least two members of staff. Statistically, the company was more often unsuccessful in terms of securing the jobs in this way. The limiting factors would be either:
It became clear to me that the priority of public sector funding is the security of investment more than just the quality of design. Or to be more precise, public sector would choose a preferred design solution once it has narrowed down the applicants to the ones that have the proven track record of similar projects and that are big enough to deal with financial or workload implications if the project runs into problems. Even though one can argue that some of these choice criteria are not really a safeguard for public investment at all, the reality is that a practice has a slim chance of securing the job in this way unless it has a proven track record. As the result, understanding public sector funding can help a new practice not to waste its resources in certain types of tendering processes.
On the other hand, Thomas Heatherwick Studio, was a practice in a similar situation, whereby it had a number of projects executed but that was comparatively small output in relation to large and well established design companies. However, it concentrated its resources into trying to acquire privately funded commissions. In a way, for a developing company this is probably more profitable strategy. As private clients can be more prone to risk taking and are likely to invite small number of practices they find suitable to bid for a job. Thus, the practice stands much higher chances of gaining new work.
During the period of a couple of months when White Design Associates were having work deficit, I became aware of the problem that a traditional architectural practice has when facing the lack of work. Namely, the time span a traditional practice can sustain itself without commissions cannot be more than a few months. In my opinion, the workload/profit ratio is much smaller in the field of architecture than in other design fields. That is why I believe Thomas Heatherwick Studio had better financial base, because apart from architecture it ventured into other design fields. As the result, it would have public art or product design commissions that had similar budgets to architectural projects. Yet the profit margin would have been much greater because the process of development of these projects involve less professionals that need to be paid from the budget. Also, it would take a project designer much less time and fewer resources to carry a project through to its final stages than it would take to complete a building development.
Therefore I believe that by offering a variety of design services and being aware of their actual profitability is a key to sustaining a business, particularly through the rough patches.
During the time spent in practice I became aware of the importance of this issue. Particularly this may be in the case of developing design businesses that have more limited resources that need to be utilised in the best way possible.
As I have mentioned before, I was particularly stricken by clear and concise way the project tasks would be dealt with by White Design Associates. This is mainly due to their design development strategy, constant collaboration with other built environment professionals and partnership with a main contractor. As the result, projects would have consistency and yet they would not be churned out like on the production line conveyor belt. Therefore, the practice would spend much less time one a single project than it would usually take for a development of similar size. For example, the practice was able to deliver a primary school within nine months. Also, it was delivered by one project architect with a limited help from an architectural assistant. As a knock on effect of quick project delivery, the practice was able to increase its output in comparison to the offices of a similar size.
These devised approaches to an integrated design development and construction management were equally beneficial to new members of staff. They could quickly learn the process that the office used to develop and deliver a building. This meant that it would take less time to integrate new employees into the team. This integration was also supported by the devised quality standards systems that have been mentioned.
Apart from getting general insight into architecture and design as a from business venture, I have also gained or developed particular skills during the time spent in practice. These can be defined as tasks that I have been introduced to and that I have executed individually or as a part of an office team.
The following section concentrates on these tasks. Rather than focusing on individual projects or on project stages as defined by RIBA Plan of Work, I will try to indicate how each of the mentioned skills developed through my involvement in various projects.
The reasons for organising the section in this manner are twofold. Firstly, the small - scale project that I have managed did not go through the development stages as defined by Plan of Work due to its size. Therefore, trying to organise my experience according to this plan would be difficult, as the actual stages of project development in some instances have significantly parted from it. Secondly, as I have been doing similar tasks on various projects, organising the section according to projects would mean that many observations would be unnecessarily repeated. Hence, the following paragraphs elaborate on particular skills. Projects that are cited within the main body of the text are briefly described within the Appendix 2.
The skills have been placed into three categories. These are:
These skills, for the purpose of the essay encompass activities undertaken by an architect or a team of architects in order to ensure that the design can be and that it is executed as it has been envisaged. They can be divided into activities such as:
From the very outset of my work experience I have been exposed to understanding the importance of drawing hierarchy. Whilst at the university level drawings are used as a device solely to communicate ideas, in practice they are more important as a guide or a manual to the construction process. Therefore, even though each drawing explains certain part of that process, together they represent one coherent totality.
One of my first tasks upon arriving at White Design Associates was to develop reflected ceiling services layout and the layouts of toilet facilities on a Kingsmead primary school project. I have quickly learned the importance of a master drawing as a common denominator for all the others. By taking parts of it, I was able to scale them up and create new drawings by adding more detailed information, such as piping/ducting routes, types of light fittings, smoke detectors and sanitary components. Using the master drawing as a departure point meant that several people can share the workload and produce work that is complementary, most importantly in terms of measurements.
At this point, I also became aware of four categories of drawings (sets), defined by the level of detail and the segment of building they are showing. Even though White Design Associates did not use these names for the sets, they correspond to location, assembly, component and detail sets as defined by Chappell and Willis (2000). I was able to utilise this knowledge some months later when I had been given to manage small-scale studio development (Yanley Lane studio). There I had to develop, to a degree, all of these drawing categories on my own.
Another important drawing skill that I have learnt is setting out. Namely, when developing the assembly set it is crucial to define critical issues such as overall building dimensions, internal dimensions such as floor heights, thickness of structural elements and so on. Also, the disposition of partition walls, doors and windows should be defined from the outset. After obtaining planning permission for Yanley Lane Studio, I had to develop an assembly set and the setting out played a major role. As vertical cedar timber - cladding boards were defining the building elevations, the building dimensions were guided by the size of a cladding board. In other words, I had to set out plan (master drawing) by positioning cladding boards around the outlined building shape and then to work inwards; drawing structural timber studs and dimensioning windows so that they are multiples of a cladding board. Another project has also taught me the importance of this activity. On Anns Grove primary school development the working sections of the building needed to be drawn, yet the project architect solely responsible for the development had to go on holiday. The rest of employees who had to engage in the project for the first time, divided the workload for these drawings. However, as the project architect has created templates with guidelines indicating crucial dimensions the tasks of drafting up these sections was not as onerous as it could have been.
Compiling drawing schedules was another activity that I had been exposed to. Namely I had to compile several of them on various projects: window and door schedule on Yanley Lane studio development and on Kingsmead primary school project; ironmongery schedule on Kingsmead primary school and on Hengistbury Head classroom of the future project. Even though this activity seems pretty straight - forward I have realised the possible implications should a schedule have mistakes. Because windows and doors are one of the biggest expenses and the delivery times can be measured in months, the mistakes can both push back the completion date and turn to be very costly. For example, the cost of windows was the second most expensive item on the bill of quantities for Yanley Lane development and it took more than ten weeks for their delivery.
Apart from drawing, architects have to communicate certain issues by compiling documents. I had to compile several information packages.
On Yanley Lane studio building, I had to submit a written report to the client. It concentrated on resolving some critical issues before the project was to be started on site. Because of topography, it would turn too costly for the studio to be linked to the main sewerage system, as the building was planed to be downhill from it. As the result I have researched into several sewerage system options, citing in report the cost and the design implication of all of them. Also, the report has concentrated on the relation of window sizes to the overall cost of the project. It is important to make design process as transparent as possible. Drawings are good tool to explain a building, but I felt that they could not explain some issues, particularly to clients who may have not engaged in the process of development beforehand.
Another instance when I had incorporated drawings in more comprehensive documents was when submitting a design for planning approval. I felt that, apart from filling in necessary forms and sending through the drawings showing the development, it is important to create a written explanation on certain design features and show how the development responds to development plans. By doing so on Yanley Lane studio and Stanpit Marsh visitor centre submissions, the planning approval came within statutory time period. Delays in planning approval can have a significant impact on the work schedule. This often may be due to misunderstanding between the architect and local authority. It is through these reports that some issues are clarified. Also, they can serve to open up a constructive discussion between these two parties, which helps in resolving problems.
I have also been involved in creating documents such as tendering specifications, whereby I have learnt the importance of cross - referencing specification clauses and component drawings. For example, I have been given to do the NBS specification section on sanitary - ware for the Hengistbury Head Classroom of the Future project and relate it to specific drawings. By citing specification clause on drawings and vice versa, the information is much more legible to the contractor and subcontractors. This may fractionally speed up the construction process.
Surveying encompasses activities such as site surveying, site investigation and site inspection. To various degrees, I have been involved in all them. Namely, in terms of architectural survey I have conducted it with senior colleagues on Yanley Lane project and Friezecroft Avenue redevelopment. It thought me the importance of spending enough time on site doing a thorough measurement and investigation, as mistakes at this early stage could not be apparent straight way and are likely to surface much later in the project. For example, because of not fixing a datum point on site from which the relative building dimensions are measured, a problem has emerged during the construction of Yanley Lane studio. As steel shoes that supported the building were higher than as drawn, and because the floor construction change was not taken into account the building was higher by 300mm than allowed by the authorities. Unfortunately, as the datum point from which the heights were measured was not set, the problem had not been solved until the stud frame and rafters were up. This meant that the studs had to be shortened adding labour time and labour cost.
I have witnessed the site investigation by structural engineer collaborating on Yanley Lane studio development. Even though the building used lightweight construction, six trial pits were dug to determine the strength of the subsoil. Implicitly and through the discussion with an engineer I became aware of issues related to this tasks. In many cases the strength of soil, which determines the foundation size and type is an unknown until the construction starts on site. The soil excavation can create serious problems as the trial pits may not always determine all the issues related to foundation design.
Finally, I have participated on site inspections both on Yanley Lane project where I have conducted few on my own, and on Kingsmead primary school as an observer. Due to the small size of studio development and because of close collaboration with the main contractor, these visits would usually be of informative nature. I would agree small amendments with the contractor or I would just observe the construction progress. I think I would need more experience with projects on site to be able to draw informed conclusions.
Apart from being involved in specific tasks, an architect also has to collaborate with other parties involved in process of development. He or she may be put in the position to oversee the overall output of a design team and contractors. Therefore, negotiation and organisational skills need to be acquired in order to be able to successfully run a project. During my time spent in practice I have been in position where I could have started developing some of them. However, this is probably the most difficult part of an architect 's job and at the same time, the one that is based on significant experience. Therefore I am aware that I would probably need several more years spent in practice to fully develop them.
In my case, I have had a chance to engage in managing the bill of quantities, manage design integration and to be involved in design team/client meetings.
As mentioned before, Yanley Lane Studio Development was small in size. The parties involved in its development were a client, the architectural practice and a specialist timber construction contractor.
The involved contractor would usually offer design and build services for small - scale timber structure developments. It was suggested to the client that White Design Associates could develop the design in collaboration with this company, utilising their knowledge of timber construction methods. Afterwards, the building contract would be awarded to this building firm. Clients were also encouraged to get another independent cost estimate for the agreed design as a safeguard for them. Therefore, the project did not go through more traditional procurement paths (Chappell and Willis, 2000).
As the result of the simplicity of the development set up, the professional boundaries were blurred to an extent. This meant that White Design Associates were responsible for obtaining final prices for several construction items that were outside the scope of services provided by the contractor. Namely, these were fixing the price of windows and the price of roof membrane. I have spent significant amount of time negotiating these items with the suppliers. However, I think I have learned a lot from the process.
For example, the roof design featured timber boards as roof cladding material. These boards had to be fixed to the main roof structure comprising rafters, plywood sheet cover and EDPM roof membrane. The only way of connecting cladding boards to the roof structure was by using timber battens, yet the batten fixings would penetrate the rubber membrane. Another set of EPDM strips had to be added to cover battens and provide extra protection. This has resulted in getting price estimates for roof membrane up to five times higher than it was provisionally allowed for this item. This alone would mean increase in project cost by 10%, which was unacceptable. After several months spent negotiating with various EPDM manufacturers and installers, I have managed to negotiate a satisfactory solution with one company. The company was able to produce single sheet roof membrane with rubber flaps spaced to correspond to the spacing of battens. The battens could be tucked under the flaps, reducing the installation time, and more importantly reducing the cost. Hence, the EPDM membrane supply and fixing was returned to the original estimate.
More than anything this has taught me the value of creative process. In order to achieve good design solution, an architect has to be inventive in every stage of the development process.
Even though it is an architect 's technical skill to integrate information from various consultants into information packages, in personal opinion, this activity has an important managerial aspect too. During the time I spent working on Yanley Lane project, and by supporting project architect developing Kingsmead primary school, I have realised that an architect has to oversee the activities of the consultants. Particularly in the case of more complex designs that go through numerous changes, it is important to ensure that all of the design team is aware of all of them. On few occasions I have noticed that the delays would be created just because a team member has developed a solution that did not take into account latest agreed design changes.
Finally, I have implicitly became aware of the vast field of legal issues that an architect has to engage in. As I have not been in the position to sign the contracts I could only observe the work done by senior colleagues within this field.
I have looked through the standard contract - RIBA small works to familiarise myself as it was used on Yanley Lane studio development. Also, I have learnt the appointment procedures that White Design Associates used when undertaking new work, which was in line with the explanations of this process that can be found in professional literature (Green, 2001).
Also, White Design Associates used mainly partnering arrangements and ventured into variations of design and build procurement paths with a major construction company.
Because my knowledge within this file is limited in scope, I could only draw a simple conclusion. Namely, that the contractual arrangements have strong influence on the nature of process of development; different types of contract favour different agendas, such as quick construction, design quality or cost certainty. An architect has to have a clear picture of a client 's needs and the office ethos in order to be able to negotiate the best possible contractual solution.
This essay has helped me not just to organise my experience, but also to realise the strong points and the weaknesses of my knowledge and skills. I guess that when going back to the academic world, in my case doing the diploma course at Oxford Brookes University, one should not regard it as a "cut off" point. Even tough the tasks performed at the university are not part of a "real" project they should be dealt with as they would be in practice. Therefore, I am hoping to use the technical skills acquired in my years out within studio projects. In this way apart from thinking about conceptual design solutions, I hope to be able to engage in incorporating structures and servicing into proposed schemes. As managing Yanley Lane studio development has taught me a lot about construction process and various issues associated with timber construction, I hope to be able to examine other forms of building in the same level of detail.
On the other hand by mapping out my experience, I became aware of my limited skills related to legal issues or project management. Obviously, I am hoping to develop these once I go back to work. Yet, in the meantime, I believe that seminars and reading about these subjects areas can help me to go back to practice more prepared. Similarly, I will try to concentrate on a strong CPD programme within my future workplace, as I think I did not emphasised enough in my years out.
Most importantly, I hope that in future I will be able to creatively engage in professional work. I think the most important thing that I have learned is the value of creative thinking; I hope to be able to contribute to devising not just interesting design, but also to an innovative business model or to construction method.
