Fish contain especial structure myofibrillar protein and great water content. The aim of this study is to examine the changes in fish protein during storage. Determinate the protein contented in fish by using sensory assessment and chemical evaluation. TVN and TAM were used for describe the different forms protein in fish. For chemical determining them, the Kjeldahl digestion unit was employed, and several chemical reagents were used for distillation and titration. In this study, compared fresh fish with older fish, consequently, the outcomes have shown great different between them. Older fish should contain more TVN and TAM than do fresh fish. Furthermore, there should be significantly different between fresh and older fish in sensory evaluation.
Fish is inspected for the presence of parasites and diseases and also for quality assessment, a term which usually refers to the degree of spoilage (Konagaya S. and Konagaya T., 1979).
As fish spoils, various physical changes become apparent, for example the odour deteriorates, the surface becomes dull and the slime on it becomes opaque, the flesh softens, the eye pupil becomes turbid and a reddish coloration develops along the backbone (Coultate, 1996). The organoleptic scales have represented for assessing the skin, outer slime, eyes, gills, peritoneum and gill and internal odours of both fresh and older fish (Torry advisory note 91, MAFF, in handbook). In borderline cases, however, chemical determinations may be of considerable value.
According to handbook, as fresh fish ages, enzymes and bacteria break down the trimethylamine oxide (TMAO) to produce trimethylamine (TMA). For chemical determinations, fish spoils can be determined for the amounts of TAM and the total volatile nitrogen (TVN) content (Pearson, 1973), and fat hydrolysis due to the increase in the acid value of the fat represents. In this study, extractability is related to the solubility of the protein spoilage. The method of gently mixing homogenizer meat with solvent was used. Low pH and high temperature cause protein denaturation resulting in low solubility (Konagaya S. and Konagaya T., 1979). And the TVN formed was determined by using the Kjeldahl procedure and titration with sodium hydroxide. Differences of solubility of myofibrillar protein accord to the temperature and pH of the meat.
Fish is considered fresh if the TVN is40mg N/100g of fish is unfit for consumption (Handbook).
In this study, a portion of sample was homogenized and added 300cm 3 of 5% trichloroacetic acid, then mixed well and stay some times. Trichloroacetic acid is one kind of quite powerful protein denaturising reagents. After homogenising, filter under vacuum into a Buchner flask. Transfer 5cm 3 of extract into a Kjeldahl digestion tube. Attach to the distillation unit; add alkali and steam distil into a flask containing 15cm 3 0.01 M hydrochloric acid. Collect 150cm 3 of distillate. Since here, the determination began.
Add 1cm 3 of indicator solution. This was deep orange solution, but few drops of this did change the colour of the solution little. Then as titrating, the pH value in solution was getting high, the colour would change into pink, and means the stop point of titration. It should be remember that, while titrated, kept shaking the flask, slowed down when got close to the final point and recorded the closing mark in case. In this practice, titrate to a faint pink end point with 0.01 M sodium hydroxide. Afterward, 2cm 3 16% neutral formaldehyde was added to the solution which resulting in acidifying the pH value in solution again for the later titration of TMA. Titrate for the liberated acid with 0.01 M sodium hydroxide until it went to faint pink again.
Meanwhile, a portion of fresh and older fish meat, respectively, were placed in the oven over night for determination of the percentage of water.
Whole fresh fish and older fish were used to determinate the proportion of protein comparatively. The raw meat from fresh fish and two weeks old fish were sampled. The method of the Kjeldahl digestion was employed. The electric balance was used to determine the weight of sample. We recorded the value to 0.001mg.
Equations used in calculating the TVN and the TMA are shown below:
In these equations, V 1 (ml) and V 2 (ml) are the titrimetric volumes of TVN and TMA, respectively. W (g) means the water content in fish samples.
For sensory assessment of fish quality, a scale refer to Torry Advisory was used. Assessed the fish by smiling, touching, and observing carefully. Then comparison with the description in the table, and marked it. At last, compared the results between fresh fish and older fish and make a conclusion.
In the sensory assessment of fish quality, four grades were used for description in different characteristics, which were E, A, B and not graded. These classes could use to describe when fish was in excellent, available, not fresh and unfit for consumption, respectively.
Results for fresh fish were that the skin was bright, shining, and iridescent; the outer slime was transparent; the corneas were convex and translucent, while the pupils were black; the gills were mucus translucent; the peritoneum was glossy, brilliant and difficult to tear from fresh issue; the smell of gills and internal odours was fresh and a bit of seaweedy or shellfishy. In this study, however, the colour of gills in fresh was slightly bleaching. This phenomenon probably due to merited fish had excessive water which came out and diluted the blood in the gills.
In contrast, for older fish, the skin was dull, gritty, marked bleaching and shrinkage; outer slime was very clotted and thick, colour of slime was yellow-brown, some black issue were diluted from the skin or scale; the cornea was completely sunken and opaque discoloured, the pupil was grey; gills were gritty, fairly easy to tear from flesh; the peritoneum was gritty and easily torn from flesh; gill and internal odours had acetic, amines and faecal smelly which was very unpleasant smell.
All these significant changes can be basically explained with reducing water content and protein breaking down during spoiling. Water loss resulted in many phenomenons changing: from convex cornea to sunken cornea; from shining skin to shrinkage; from thin to thick outer slime. The examples for protein broke down were the changes in cornea from translucent to opaque discoloured; pupils were from black to grey; from transparent to yellow-brown in outer slime; and very unpleasant smell from volatile bases such ammonia.
When examined whether or not the gills and peritoneum were easily torn from fresh, as known that, older fish was much easier than was fresh fish. These outcome can be explained for the myofibrillar protein was broken down which resulting in the issue was easily to be separated. This result had shown its great agreement with public reports:
In fish, rigor takes places faster than in land animals, and also terminates faster. This phenomenon probably can be explained that fish have unusually watery and fibrous meat. Protein is the material which can be broken down by bacteria. Moreover, softening of meat hastens the penetration which leads to faster decomposition (Taneko, 1981). In other words, since the fish star to spoil, under the same conditions, the process would be increased in side the issue.
In the second practice, chemical methods were used for evaluation of fish spoilage. As mentioned before, the results came from fresh fish and older fish were shown in the table 1 below:
From the figures for TVN can be seen that the older fish contained much greater than did fresh fish. These respected results can be explained as the processing of spoilage, bacterial and enzymic action which results in the production of various volatile compounds, in particular trimethylamine (TMA), dimethylamine (DMA), ammonia and volatile acids (Wong, 1967 in Pearson, 1976). These were diluted into the trichloroacetic acid at the beginning of the practice. These also mean that older fish had further spoiled than fresh fish due to more protein was broken down.
Compared with the reported value shown in introduction part, the TVN value shown in both fresh and older fish were significant higher ( 40mg N/100g). This distinguishes probably due to increasing ammonia formed by breakdown of protein during the high temperature distillation. According to Pearson and Muslemuddin, this problem can be prevented by distilling the intact sample under reduced pressure at 50 oC (Pearson, 1976).
When looked at the figures for water content, fresh fish contained obviously greater value than did the older fish and it showed its agreement with acceptable value. There was one thing should be bonded in mind that the samples for determining water content differed from that for determining the proportion of TVN and TMA. But nevertheless, they were used in the same equations that should result in there more or less change occurred in results.
Referred to the figures for TMA in fresh fish had completely agreed with the accepted values. The reason is the more fresh fish is, the lower TMA contented. Older fish had significantly higher figure than that of fresh fish. This can explain the physical changes on older fish such as very unpleasant smell. As spoilage processing, the more TMA could be produced in fish meat, the stronger smell could be.
Further more, it should be noted that before titrated the solution from older fish, there too much indicator solution was added which resulting in strong colour in solution. This could more or less influence the judgement with colour changed which resulting in the wrong reading for the ending points. This could be another reason for getting not accurate results.
Over view the practice, these methods for determining TVN and TAM in fish during different process spoilage were efficient and relatively accurate. When compared with the public values, most of results shown their agreement. Older fish had worse physical conditions and higher figures in TVN and TAM than had fresh fish. Although the contentions of TVN were considerablely higher than usually value which due to impurity of the reaction occurs during distillation.
