Contents 1 1 Introduction 2 2 A review of the literature 2 2a Why the case-study approach? 2 2b Chinese Learners of English 3 2c Writing at Graduate level 3 3 Method 4 3a Case Study Profile 4 3b Interviews 5 3c Triangulation 6 4 Findings 6 4a Sunny 's views on her own learning attitudes and difficulties 6 4b Differences between Sunny 's Academic experience in China and Britain. 7 4c Sunny 's views on native speaker interaction 7 4d Sunny 's tested level of English and academic skill 7 4e Sunny 's tutors' views 7 4f Demands of Sunny 's future course: Masters in International Management8 5 Discussion 8 5a Cultural and academic acclimatisation 8 5b Writing skills: Moving towards participation in an academic community 9 6 Conclusion and Recommendations 10 7 Limitations of this study 10.
References 12.
Appendix 1 15.
Appendix 2 15.
Appendix 3 16.
There are currently more than 300,000 international students studying at Higher Education institutions in the UK. This figure is set to increase dramatically as Universities and the government are making every effort to attract more international students into the country (BBC, 2006) The largest single country providing these students is China, and these international students are entering Postgraduate courses here in increasing numbers. (BBC, 2004) Consequently, Universities have had to provide much greater levels of English language and academic skills support, and in the last decade an increasing number of Universities have initiated Pre- Masters English for Academic Purposes (EAP) courses. One such University is Oxford Brookes, whose English Language Centre offers a Graduate Preparation Diploma (GPDip), and it is from this course that my subject was chosen.
This paper will take the form of a case study of an individual Chinese student at the beginning of the second semester of her G.P.Dip course, planning to start her Masters Course in September of this year. Although many other issues were dealt with during the course of this study, for the purpose of this assignment, the main issue emerging was whether the subject 's primary difficulties stemmed from differences in cultural and academic norms and expectations, or merely from some gaps in linguistic competence. Due to the constraints of the assignment in terms of length, the focus will further be narrowed to her research, and particularly writing skills and how they might meet the standards required. Certain tentative conclusions will then be drawn both as to the possible present effectiveness of her current study programme, and any recommendations as to how her time could best be used in the interim period between the end of this semester and her Masters Programme.
The case study approach, although widely used in many social sciences, education and linguistics, has been criticised by some empirical researchers even to the extent that some deem it not even to be a legitimate form of research. They point to the fact that the findings are subjective and often based on the opinions or beliefs of a single or very few people, and as such do not consist of valid empirical data. Admittedly, there are some limitations to using case study research, as outlined in Cohen et al (2000) and Nunan (1992), many of which are concerned with difficulties in averaging data. However, this approach is now widely used as an unapologetically subjective but nevertheless revealing form of study. 'There is something dehumanising about an approach which implies behaviour which can be objectively measured'. The case study is naturalistic and qualitative, seeking to 'derive general principles, theories or truths from an investigation of single instances rather than proving a theory through experimentation'. That is to say, our one case, when seen from a variety of angles, may provide insight into other areas. It follows the tradition of ethnographic research', in so much as the context of the case has a  'significant influence' on the subject in question (Nunan, 1992), and is a 'unique' picture of an individual (Stake, 1995). Because of its nature, it does not follow one research method, but draws from numerous methods, including biographic, ethnographic, and naturalistic methods., with a 'triangulated' approach being taken , so that a 'thick profile' is drawn (Geertz, 1973 ). Many educators, especially teachers, gain much from such anecdotal evidence and may find this more holistic approach more accessible to them than more empirical methods (Wallace, 1999, 161). As Stake (1995) points out, the responsibility lies not with the writer, but the reader to make generalisations.
In view of the fact that my informant was a Chinese student, I felt it was appropriate to view the study from a cross- cultural perspective. While some reject such stereotyping, (eg Littlewood, 2000), many connect the learning styles of East Asian, and particularly Chinese learners, to how successful they are as learners of English (e.g. Sinclair, 2000; Manfred, 2004). Lixian and Cortezzi 's (1996) model illustrates differences between Chinese and Western attitudes to various aspects of learning (appendix 1), and they chronicle in their paper how these differences can have an impact on the students' learning experience. Their findings reinforce the generally held stereotype of Chinese education as following the Confucian tradition, with strictly defined roles attributed to both teachers and students. There has been a general trend to 'problematise' Chinese learning methods in general, stating for example that Chinese students are 'passive' (Manfred,2004), they do not develop coherent 'argumentation - oriented discourse' (Green1991, in Manfred 2004). Additionally, Marr (2000), in his research into what he calls the 'Language shock' felt by a group of Chinese students studying in London, blames a lack of  'socio-linguistic awareness' for the disappointment and lack of understanding felt by the group. Turner 's research on a group of Chinese Business Masters students seem to confirm the lack of preparedness for British conventions, finding the students resistant to changing their learning strategies, as well as experiencing loneliness and isolation on the course. (2006).
Such cultural considerations just mentioned, are exacerbated by the linguistic and academic difficulties of students embarking on graduate level studies. Rudby ( 2005) acknowledges the difficulties experienced by both native and non-native speakers in terms of becoming able to produce high quality research at this level. The problem is so great for L2 speakers, that she advocates a rigorous 'multi-thrust approach' in supporting international Masters students, involving many different types of input, such as clinics, workshops, presentations and language classes, but acknowledges the difficulty of any one course meeting such ambitious aims. Turner (2006) also acknowledges the complexity of writing academic texts, describing the difficulty in establishing what is actually a language problem, and what is an analytical or content problem. She derides the idea of the EAP support class as being there to  'sort out' all the language problems of the student.
In many studies the L1 student is shown to have a great deal more difficulties in achieving an appropriate linguistic level. Hinkel identifies some of the key differences between samples of non-native and native writing, talking of L2 writing at this level as often typifying  'simplicity without elegance', with a lack of the richness and variety that is more often found in L1 writing. Neville and Buckingham (1996) and later Hyland (1999) analyse some of these linguistic options for citation in detail, with the former looking at the choices that native speakers make as students compared with mature academics. Phan (2006) criticises some Western writers, researchers and teachers for still under-estimating such difficulties experienced by many L1 users in coping with the demands of citation and research. She asks tutors to give more support and explicit guidelines in helping students with issues of citation and avoiding plagiarism.
There is also the problem not only of how to teach, but of what to teach, as research has recognised the difference in conventions across different academic communities. (E.g. Peacock and Ho, 2003; Kirkpatrick2003). Badger (1996), takes on the challenge of accommodating multi-discipline students within one EAP class, through encouraging students to be 'linguists' in their own areas of research.. They are set individual research tasks in order to analyse the grammatical and lexical forms of papers from their own field. How to handle this task as a teacher in a class of up to twenty students may not be adequately covered within the research paper. Casanave (2003) offers a similar, but perhaps more easily applied solution, with students analysing papers from the field of Applied Linguistics; her reasoning being that as well as being a useful source of academic language, the literature would also provide insight into the experience that the students themselves are having as participants in an EAP 'community'. As has been shown, the issue of how to accommodate L1 learners into a very demanding academic community, particularly students from a different cultural and linguistic background, is an enormous challenge for those setting up EAP courses.
The student in question is a 23-year-old Chinese female student, who I shall call 'Sunny' for the purposes of the paper. Sunny arrived in the first semester of the academic year, in order to embark on a one-year (2-semester) pre-Masters EAP course. She studied an undergraduate honours degree in English Language at Wen Zhou University in China and wishes to take a one-year Masters course in International Management. She achieved reasonable results in her Undergraduate studies. When I came to meet her for the first time in February 2006 early in the second semester she had recently been given two conditional offers, dependent on achieving adequate IELTS scores.
Sunny is unusual in that she is probably more socially integrated into British culture than many students, having joined a local church and involved herself fully in the life of the church community. She has also spent her vacation travelling in Britain with non-Chinese friends, further establishing links with her host country. She has been a very willing and communicative case study, who in spite of a certain initial shyness has been extremely forthcoming about her experiences to date. She gave me access to any of her assignments that she had to hand, and was very happy to allow me to talk to her tutors about her needs and abilities, as well as to observe her where possible.
Sunny was one of a number of volunteers, and what Stake (1995) calls an 'intrinsic' case study., in that she was not chosen to be in any way a typical or representative student from the course, or one showing particular strengths or weaknesses. A series of four interviews were carried out with the subject, over a period of two months. These were generally held in a neutral and relaxed area, such as the University coffee shop.
The first interview was very much focusing on Sunny 's perceptions of her own academic strengths and weaknesses, taking the form of a needs analysis. In order to maintain a relaxed atmosphere, Sunny was not handed a list of questions, but instead asked loosely framed questions around a topic in the form of a semi-structured interview, generally held to be a relaxed, but containable method of questioning (Wallace 1999, Cohen et al 2000) I then asked a more open question around each topic, to allow Sunny to speak more freely. The comments were then recorded in the form of hand written notes, which have been transcribed (see Appendix 2).
These answers formed the basis of three more follow-up interviews, where the focus shifted to certain issues arising from the first meeting. The second interview was in the format of a series of open questions such as "Tell me about your experience of teachers in China and Britain", and concentrated on differences and similarities between Sunny 's learning experiences in the two countries. I based this format on Lixian and Cortezzi 's (1996) table comparing cultural and academic attitudes between the two traditions. (See appendix 1) The third interview comprised an analysis of Sunny 's performance. She preferred not to be tested by me as part of the interview, so instead we looked at some of her written work for her undergraduate module, at the marks she had achieved during her academic study in Britain, and at her IELTS score. The final interview comprised an evaluation by Sunny of her present academic studies, having finished her EAP course and her perceived readiness for Post-graduate study.
Although interviews formed the main emphasis of this study, it was felt important to give a rounded picture, or as Geertz describes a 'thick description' (1973) of the subject and her experience. I therefore contacted Sunny 's course tutors for assessment of her linguistic and academic proficiency, looked at examples of her oral and written work, and contacted her future Master 's course module leader, in order to find out in more detail what her needs as a post graduate international Management student would be.
I had planned to observe some of her classes, but because of timetable clashes and the timing of exams, this proved impossible. These multiple perspectives allowed a fuller picture of the subject to emerge.
A large amount of data was collected during the course of the case study, and while attempting to maintain the impartiality necessary for such a study, for the purposes of this assignment I will focus on some of the key areas emerging from the interviews and the other contacts made during the course of the study.
Sunny showed a great deal of insight into her own abilities and weaknesses and was able to answer very clearly about the areas she still struggled with. (See Appendix 2) She seemed to feel competent in the more basic academic skills, and to have improved generally in many of the areas needed. She expressed the opinion, however, that she still had a long way to go in terms of her linguistic abilities, her analytical skills and in her ability to use sources successfully in her research essays. These are areas she feels she will need to work on before the start of her Masters course. (For more details see appendix 2).
Many of Sunny 's comments centred around the area of her expectations of academic study in Britain, based on the experiences she had had of studying in China. She highlighted very clearly some contrasts. The role of teacher she sees as more distant and even cold in Britain, with the student needing to make appointments or communicate by email, rather than the tutor being keen to follow up the student on a face-to-face basis.. At first Sunny found this difficult, but has grown to accept that she had to ask more from the tutor, or get answers from other students. Sunny found the less explicit teaching style of her teachers in Britian very confusing and difficult at first. She often had to check with other students about what was required, and sometimes she felt she missed the point of what was needed. However, she also felt that this allowed her to become more independent in her learning, to build greater bonds between her classmates and to gain more confidence in asking questions. She was generally positive in her responses about the differences in approach she had encountered in Britian, but found that there was still a great deal to get used to in terms of meeting tutors' expectations. These findings can be seen in more detail in appendix 3.
The student 's dealings with native speaker peers in Britain seemed more problematic. Sunny often mentioned the gulf between herself and other 'expert' users of English on her Undergraduate module course, and she feels very uncomfortable in entering into conversation with them. She draws a definite distinction between her native and non-native contact so far, and still seems nervous in initiating interaction with native speakers of English, both inside and outside the classroom.
In my conversations with Sunny, and looking at her writing, I would place her at the Upper Intermediate level of English, or in IELTS terms around an IELTS 5.5 or 6. This is the result she achieved before coming to Britain, and I did not feel she had advanced much beyond this level. Her writing sample seemed to bear witness to this; she performed quite well at a basic structure level, but did not use a great deal of lexical or grammatical complexity, and demonstrated a lack of clause subordination and effective synonymy.
From the opinions of two of Sunny 's tutors, I was able to gain an insight into how she has been perceived on the course I also looked at written feedback on her Undergraduate module assignment.
Both EAP tutors very much highlighted Sunny as a 'good student' in terms of her positive attitude, attendance, hard work study skills and excellent organisation levels, but felt that her linguistic ability and possible lack of confidence made it difficult for her to cope with some aspects of the course, and caused her to achieve quite low marks in her assessed work.
In her speaking skills class her tutor reported that she did try hard to enter into discussion, but often found it difficult to interact fully with more confident students, and during her final presentation lacked fluency and was unable to demonstrate effective use of intonation in order to highlight key points. Her reading tutor, as Sunny herself had said, identified at times a failure to successfully evaluate sources, or to identify the author 's viewpoint when reading. The comment the tutor made was ' I feel she is perhaps still struggling to cope on a sentence level with the text, which means that a wider view of the overall meaning and a confidence in criticising this viewpoint is beyond her'.
This view seems also to be reflected in the comments on her Undergraduate assignment. Although Sunny did pass, her score was low mainly because of 'language problems' throughout the piece of work. Other areas were also highlighted, such as a lack of critical evaluation of sources and detailed analysis, but language was definitely flagged as the major source of worry. Unfortunately no other writing was available for me to look at, but Sunny herself felt that extended essays and research skills incorporating secondary sources were her major source of difficulty.
Sunny has made an unusual and probably very sensible choice in terms of her future Masters course. International Management, according to the Brookes Module leader, is a course designed around students from a variety of disciplinary backgrounds and nationalities. It aims to draw from different cultural, national and management identities rather than imposing any sense of what is 'Western' management style on its students. The majority and often the totality of students registering for the course, are international non -L1 students, and as such course designers and instructors are very conscious of the difficulties faced by international students. The tutor I spoke to held a very positive view of the ability of students from an EAP background to cope with the demands of the course, and stated that much academic support is given to those with academic difficulties.
In terms of social skills, and her non-academic studies, Sunny seems to have acclimatised well to her new life in Britain. She has built up a network of contacts in church and sporting activities, as well as having a group of close friends from the international community at Brookes. The culture shock described in many of the studies outlined previously (e.g. Marr 2000; Turner 2006) may have been an issue upon arrival for Sunny, but she has coped well with the experience. However, with regard to her academic studies, the process does seem to have taken much longer. The gap between her expectations of her course, fellow students and tutors, and the reality experienced, meant that Sunny experienced a great deal of anxiety in her first semester; consequently she may have failed, or at least felt she had failed to achieve the results she was capable of. This closely ties in with both a study of Indonesian postgraduate students in Australia, and of Chinese students in America who were often baffled by what their tutors wanted. (Sinclair 2000; Guofang 2001) This is, though, an adjustment not only necessary for non-native students. As a native speaker Masters student, I have also found at times a lack of explicitness in instructions and difficulty in always knowing what was wanted by the tutors, but perhaps I have been able to deal with this more effectively through such clarification strategies as questioning the tutor, and 'reading between the lines' of assessment criteria. With the sheer number of meta-cognitive strategies and multiple competencies necessary in dealing with Post-graduate research based study, it is not surprising that those with an added linguistic barrier find the experience difficult. As regards Sunny 's EAP course experience, even given the intensity and workload, perhaps giving students more explanation as to the 'why', or the 'ethos' of what is expected might have been a useful extension to the course. For example, that tutors do not check up on their tutees probably seems to these tutors a conscious effort to develop independent thinking in their students, while to the student it may be seen as a lack of interest or laziness.
In spite of all this Sunny does seem to have come on a long journey in understanding more of what is required, and has developed her own learning strategies, such as asking other students, checking the handbook, finishing assignments in plenty of time to include changes, and asking questions in class. Perhaps even a six month course, useful as it is, is just not enough to prepare a student for the challenging year ahead.
While Sunny does seem to have been generally successful in becoming accustomed to a new environment, she does seem to be still under-prepared in terms of her ability to produce competently researched papers. She arrived with a satisfactory writing score (IELTS 6) to join the course, but had never even in L1 had to write extended essays using secondary sources. With such a steep learning curve for all international students at this level (Rubdy, 2005) it is not surprising that Sunny was unable at first to perform at a high level in terms of her writing skills. In spite of, as she said, checking and rechecking, she lacked analysis, critical thinking and adequate citation skills, as well as struggling with the norms of academic grammar. Having said that, I feel perhaps we have unrealistic expectations of where a student should be at the beginning of a Masters course. Indeed, many native speakers are also incredibly unprepared for post-graduate study, and do not have the same levels of preparation as their L2 peers in terms of familiarity with the library, researching skills, or with academic journals. It is true they do not have the same linguistic difficulties, but may lack some of the academic skills already practised by and familiar to many EAP students. In Sunny 's case it seems that many of her difficulties stem from problems with reading, especially her ability to identify viewpoint: a fundamental skill if she is going to choose and incorporate sources wisely. Perhaps she would benefit from such study as Badger (1999) outlined, making her a linguist in her own genre.
This study, although extremely limited in scope, has been a useful insight into the life of an EAP student who is wishing to pursue her Graduate career in Britain. Sunny has successfully passed all assessment criteria, and is likely to be accepted on the course she wishes to study in International Management. Her experiences do demonstrate very clearly that even while developing very successful study skills, the time taken for a non- native student to reach Masters' level can be significant. The sheer volume of new skills to be learnt, the assimilation into the life of the university as well as the challenge of meeting deadlines can mean that progress in linguistic terms may be slow. It is difficult to determine the implications of this finding. Does this mean that a much greater level of attention should be paid to linguistic development in EAP courses, obviously at the expense of the development of other skills? What can certainly be seen is that the individual needs of one student may differ greatly from another. I feel, therefore, that there should be much more flexibility built into EAP courses, where students can be guided into the areas they really need to study. This perhaps might have implications in terms of assessment, with fewer long assignments at the beginning of the course, but may allow students to develop with less pressure the meta-cognitive and linguistic competence they will need. The advent of more academic e-learning materials (eg Cauldwell, Streaming Speech) will, I feel assist greatly in this process, where students can work independently on their own areas of need. This of course means that much will have to be done in terms of producing quality academic software, in particular for the reading and writing skills needed at this level. Returning to our individual and the main focus of our study, Sunny could spend her time now immersing herself in her reading lists for her course, as well as analysing the method of discourse familiar to this academic community. She could also work though such academic course books as Bailey 's Academic Writing (2003), which may help her to enrich the number of linguistic choices available to her in her future assignments and papers.
Although interesting, this study cannot be said to have major implications for course design. It was extremely limited in terms of time, access to student and tutors, and number of informants. Sunny 's possible need to focus on her grammar and linguistic competence may not be representative of other members of her group or of EAP students in general. For a more effective study, at least two more cases, possibly from different ethnic backgrounds could be examined in order to compare the reactions of the participants. I also felt the length of time and the amount of meetings possible gave only a superficial view of her life at Brookes. For a more faithfully naturalistic and ethnographic study, I would have also liked to shadow her for at least a day, observing classes, visiting the library and noticing her interaction with classmates and tutors. The process of tracking students through their EAP course and into their Post-graduate studies as a longitudinal study is one as yet not widely explored. . To truly assess the success of an EAP course in preparing a student, such a retrospective view of the student already involved in their Masters course would surely be a useful and fruitful area for further research.
