This essay will attempt to accurately describe the different methods employed by qualitative researchers to ensure the quality of their data. Therefore, this essay will first briefly describe and explain the methods adopted in quantitative research, and use this to highlight the different methods used by qualitative researchers.
Quantitative research has been described as being concerned with counting, for example, to discover the proportion of one make of a car to another in a particular area. (Holliday, 2002) This kind of research would produce numbers that could be measured against, for example, a set of data from a different area. These types of measurements can be a useful tool in research and have the advantage of making information collecting more precise, for example, not guesswork by the researcher, and numbers can be communicated across many different languages, cultures and societies. (Polit and Hungler, 1997) However, errors in measurements are possible with quantitative data, for example, transitory personal factors when an individual 's personal feelings or mood could affect their ability to participate in a research study. (Polit and Hungler, 1997) Also, there are many difficulties associated with questionnaires, which are a common tool used in quantitative research, for instance, many people may not understand a lot of the questions. (Holliday, 2002).
To overcome errors in measurement, quantitative researchers use reliability to assess the quality and consistency of their data, for instance, a measurement is repeated a large number of times and if it produces low variation it is considered to be reliable. Reliability has three characteristics in quantitative research these are; stability, internal consistency and equivalence. Validity is also used in quantitative research to ensure that what the researchers think is being measured is actually being measured, this is tested using; content validity, criterion- related validity and construct validity. (Holliday, 2002).
It is clear from this brief description that validating quantitative data is a complex problem; however, qualitative research is more concerned with producing descriptions of the social world. (Per  kyl  , 1997) Some researchers mention that whilst conducting their study they are able to gain in depth knowledge of their participants as people and their lives. (Morse, 1992 and Hollway and Jefferson, 2000) Holliday (2002) has identified that the difficulties associated with producing quality data increase with qualitative research due to the close contact with participants. However, researchers believe that it is possible to describe social interactions that can stand up to rigorous data quality tests. (Hammersley (1992) cited in Per  kyl  , 1997) In further support of this, Holliday believes that to understand human behaviour it is inadequate to rely on quantitative surveys and statistics. This is due to the fact that, unlike quantitative research, qualitative research does not have to follow a strict procedure; therefore, each design will be different. (2002).
Despite the difficulties involved, qualitative researchers are committed to proving their data is of a high quality and trustworthy. There are four main criteria for establishing trustworthiness in qualitative research these include; credibility, dependability, confirmability and transferability each one will be described in more detail below. (Lincoln and Guba (1985) cited in Polit and Hungler, 1997) Credibility is concerned with having confidence in the truth of the data, Lincoln and Guba have identified two characteristics of this; firstly that a researcher must conduct their study in a way to enhance plausibility and second to ensure credibility is demonstrated. (1985 cited in Polit and Hungler, 1997) Credibility can be demonstrated using prolonged engagement which signifies the importance of spending as much time as possible with the participants and to ensure different days and times of the day are included. This will also aid the researcher in gaining trust and rapport with the participants. (Bowling, 1997) Another method used by qualitative researchers is persistent observation which requires the researcher to focus on relevant information. (Polit and Hungler, 1997) However, this can prove difficult due to the Hawthorne effect which identified that peoples behaviour may change due to them being studied. (Roethlisbergor and Dickson (1939) cited in Bowling, 1997) However, Clark and Bowling, believe this effect may decline over a longer period of time. (1990, cited in Bowling, 1997).
Triangulation is another method; where multiple characteristics are used to demonstrate credibility. Denzin (1989 cited in Polit and Hungler, 1997) has identified four types of triangulation used in qualitative research. Data source triangulation occurs when many different data sources are used, for example, interviewing many different people on the same issue. Investigator triangulation refers to many individual researchers independently collecting, analysing and interpreting the same set of data. Theory triangulation is when many different perspectives are applied to interpret the same set of data. Method triangulation occurs when numerous methods are applied to a research, for example, using both observations and interviews.
There are also a number of external checks that may demonstrate credibility these include; peer debriefing, member checks, searching for disconfirming evidence and researcher credibility. (Polit and Hungler, 1997) Peer debriefing involves one or more objective peers who will independently review the research. Member checks are when the researcher conducts feedback sessions to the participants to ensure they have made the correct interpretations. Searching for disconfirming evidence involves; the researcher systematically looking through all their data to discover deviant cases, this functions to strengthen the final research outcomes by continuously refining hypotheses. (Per  kyl  . 1997) Patton, has identified that a researchers training, qualifications and experience can be important to prove confidence in data. (1990 cited in Polit and Hungler, 1997) It is obvious from the numerous checks made to demonstrate credibility, that qualitative researchers view this as an essential task when conducting studies.
Dependability refers to the stability of data over time and in different conditions, there are two methods used to demonstrate this; stepwise replication and inquiry audit. (Polit and Hungler, 1997) Stepwise replication involves the research team being divided into two, and each team analyse the same data separately. An inquiry audit is the close scrutiny of all data and methods used by an external reviewer. Confirmability occurs when two or more independent individuals agree on the interpretations made by a piece of research. This can be demonstrated using an inquiry audit; however, in this case a researcher must provide an audit trail, which consists of collection of all materials and documents used. Finally, transferability refers to whether the research findings can be transferred to other settings and other groups of people. (Per  kyl  , 1997) It is again obvious from the numerous methods available that qualitative researchers view demonstrating trustworthiness as an important aspect of their research.
In conclusion, quantitative and qualitative research view the world differently, therefore, they have different methods of conducting their research. It would not be appropriate to apply statistics to a qualitative study; however, it is still necessary to demonstrate the quality of the data produced. Otherwise it would be very simple for qualitative studies to be published; however, this would only serve to undermine the researchers who have worked hard to ensure the trustworthiness of their findings. Therefore, qualitative researchers have developed the various methods described in this essay to show they are just as committed to producing significant and meaningful results as any other researcher.
