Functional activities that involve simultaneous knee extension and hip flexion are dependant on hamstring extensibility (Kisner and Colby 1996: 454). To test the extensibility of this muscle group, the range of hip flexion can be measured with an active straight-leg raise (SLR) (Kendall et al 2005: 383). Due to passive insufficiency, the hamstrings provide passive resistance to hip flexion due to length insufficiency when stretched already over the extended knee (Gaskell 2003: 29).
This study seeks to demonstrate passive insufficiency by comparing the range of active hip flexion when the knee is allowed to flex to that when the knee is fully extended. This practical application of propositional anatomical knowledge will help develop understanding in the author. Furthermore by using electrogoniometry to measure range of movement (ROM), the author will gain familiarisation in this method of human movement measurement. The study will also encompass some of the clinical implications for passive insufficiency in the hamstrings.
The hamstrings are contained in the posterior compartment of the thigh and consist of the biceps femoris, semitendinous and semimembranous muscles (Drake, Vogl and Mitchell: 525). They cross both hip and knee joints and when contracted they extend the hip and flex the knee. This movement combination is due to the position of the muscle attachments relative to the joints.
All three muscles have origins on the ischial tuberosity of the pelvic bone, which is posterior relative to the hip (Drake, Vogl and Mitchell: 484). Biceps femoris also has a short head, which attaches to the posterior shaft of the femur on the linea aspera. The distal portion of the muscles cross posterior to the tibiofemoral joint of the knee, and insert on the bones of the leg; biceps femoris to the head of the fibula, semitendinous to the medial surface of the proximal tibia and semimembranous to the medial tibial condyle.
The opposite movement of hip flexion and knee extension is employed in the SLR and stretches the hamstrings over both joints. Pelvic-femoral ROM is produced in the active SLR primarily by the iliopsoas and the quadriceps (Sodenburg 1996: 264). This movement is also limited by active insufficiency of rectus femoris (Sodenburg 1996: 264); the only two joint muscle of the quadriceps. Due to excessive shortening over both joints, the active muscle is insufficient in length to generate enough tension to over come the resistance provided by the weight of the lower limb and the hamstrings.
The central nervous system coordinates the contraction and relaxation of the various muscles involved in with the straight leg raise. Part of this control occurs in the spinal cord with reflex arcs used to produce reciprocal innervation to contract the agonistic muscles and relax the antagonistic muscles (Martini 2006: 445). The reflex arcs are also associated with reflex actions such as the stretch reflex and the Golgi tendon reflex.
The stretch reflex is initiated by muscle spindle cells detecting a rapid muscle stretch and results in contraction of the stretched muscle and relaxation of the reciprocal muscle. This reflex arc does not prevent all rapid muscle stretching as it can be over-ridden by higher motor control centres (Martini 2006: 445). The Golgi tendon reflex helps to prevent damage associated with excessive muscle stretch and produces the opposite reaction compared to the stretch reflex; the stretched muscle is relaxed and the reciprocal muscle is contracted. Unfortunately the Golgi tendon reflex is frequently inadequate to protect muscles and tendons of an athlete, who due to large forces and rapid movements are particularly prone to hamstring tears (Seeley, Stephens and Tate 2003: 408).
Hamstring extensibility was measured using a passive SLR in a study that included 20 healthy Dutch medical students in two control groups (Halbertsma et al 2001). The maximum pelvic-femoral angle was measured with an electrogoniometer over the hip and the mean found to be 55.0   (S.D.=5.40, n=8) for the flexible control group (FG) and 48.2   (S.D.=6.69, n=12) for the stiff control group (SG) (Halbertsma et al 2001:236). This indicated the SG had shorter hamstrings than the FG.
Short hamstrings are reportedly associated with posterior rotation of the pelvis, which tends to flatten the lumbar spine and may increase the risk of low back pain (Oatis 2004: 749). The above study investigated this link by comparing the control groups to a patient group (PG) with non-specific lower back pain (NSLBP). The mean pelvic-femoral angle for the PG was found to be 40.3   (S.D.=10.41, n=20) indicating reduced hamstring extensibility compared to the SG. However the resistance force produced by the hamstrings was found to be lower and the difference in extensibility was attributed to the stretch tolerance of the patients rather than shortness in hamstrings (Halbertsma et al 2001:238).
The SLR test for hamstring length may incorporate pelvic rotation, which was the case in the above study. Including pelvic rotation, the passive SLR ROM was found to be 84.4   for the FG, 77.2   for the SG and 66.5   for the PG. Kendall et al (2005: 383) suggest normal active SLR ROM to be 80   with the lower back and sacrum flat on the table to stabilize the pelvis in posterior tilt. Although direct comparison of active and passive SLR ROM is limited, this would suggest both SG and PG have abnormally short hamstrings and would benefit from treatment to lengthen the hamstrings. However the NSLBP in the PG invalidated this as a test for hamstring shortness and the study concluded stretching exercises were not indicated especially due to the possible role of the ischiadic nerve or roots in the pain felt by these patients (Halbertsma et al 2001:238).
This study included an experiment to quantitatively test the established theory of passive insufficiency in the hamstrings. The sample consisted of all the healthy subjects within a particular student group that were tasked with this assignment. One student was excluded due to previous knee pathology, which left 12 subjects.
The experiment involved active ROM in the dominant hip without warm-up or pre-stretching, as this was considered more representative of functional activities. For safety the subjects were asked to perform the movement slowly and not attempt to exceed their stretch tolerance. Pelvic-femoral angle was measured using equipment supplied by Biometrics; an SG150 electrogoniometer and an angle display unit. The operating manual (Biometrics 1999) guided the choice of electrogoniometer and also its attachment and positioning; direct to the skin by double-sided tape and over the lateral aspect of the hip, orientated vertically with the subject in standing. As this was easiest with the hip completely exposed, the attachment and position was preformed by each of the students themselves.
The experiment consisted of two active tests of hip flexion; one with the knee flexed and one with the knee extended. Each tested started with the subject supine on a plinth with both knees extended and an assistant stabilising the pelvis. The first test involved the subject flexing the hip and allowing the knee to also flex and the second test involved the subject flexed their hip and keeping their knee extended. Each test was preformed three times for each subject.
The above experimental procedure was developed following a pilot study, which revealed a possible risk to the lower back if the pelvis was not stabilised. One subject showed excessive posterior pelvic rotation as they attempted to increase hip flexion by inadvertently raising one side of pelvis away from the plinth. The pilot study was preformed with the electrogoniometer connected to a data logger, which required uploading to a PC after completion. The results, which are included in the appendix, give angular displacement over time as well as the maximum angular displacement. However as the maximum angular displacement was of the prime concern in demonstrating passive insufficiency, the method was simplified to measure the static angle at maximum hip flexion using the angle display unit.
Table 1 presents data for each subject including personal data, the mean of the examined variables and difference between these variables. Figure 1 allows comparison of the subjects' maximum pelvic-femoral angle with knee flexed and extended. The differences between these variables are shown in Figure 2. Descriptive statistic of variables and the differences are presented in table 2.
The maximum pelvic-femoral angle was greater with knee flex than with knee extended as shown by figure 1. This is in accordance with the theory of passive insufficiency in the hamstrings.
The SLR is commonly used in clinical practice as an indication of short hamstrings. Kendle et al (2005:383) suggest 80   indicates normal hamstring length in active SLR as might be measured with a manual goniometer placed along the plinth. This ROM includes pelvic rotation however and cannot be compared with the figures in this study for pelvic-femoral movement measured with an electrogoniometer. A more suitable comparison can be made with the results for the Dutch students given in the literature review (Halbertsma et al). This study also measured pelvic-femoral angle using an electrogoniometer (2001: 234), although unfortunately their results were obtained using a passive SLR.
The mean maximum pelvic-femoral found in the active SLR for the British students in this study, is given in table 2 as 59.7  . Halbertsma et al, using the passive SLR, found this figure to be 55.0   for their flexible control group (2001:238). This would suggest the British students had greater extensibility in their hamstrings, which would not be expected considering the British students had not be split into flexible and stiff groups. The increase in extensibility may be due to the fact the British students preformed an active SLR. Reciprocal inhibition due to contraction of the quadriceps may have helped extension of the hamstrings.
The validity of the results may be limited due to errors in the positioning of the electrogoniometer. As described in the methodology section, the electrogoniometer was placed centrally over the greater trochanter of the femur. This position is slightly distal to centre of the hip joint and the upper margin of the greater trochanter may have given more accurate results.
Further inaccuracies could have been introduced by variance in positioning of the electrogoniometer, as each student preformed the positioning themselves. A large inaccuracy in the results for one student, which was evident on eyeballing ROM, was found to be due to error in positioning. Subsequent correction in positioning produced more consistent results.
This study successfully demonstrated passive insufficiency in the hamstrings. Comparison to the literature reveal the results to be similar to that found in the literature. Possible clinical problems associated with the hamstrings have been discussed including the reported association between tight hamstrings and lower back pain.
