This conceptual paper aims to provide an insight of how hotel managers can define and use performance measurement targets to support the long-term strategy of their organisation, through different performance measurement models and perspectives.
A wide range of literature is used to provide the reader with a definition of performance measurement, strategy and with the key measures and models used in the hospitality business. The relationship between strategy and performance measures is analysed, and a scheme is proposed to facilitate the transfer of the latter to the former.
The findings of the research indicated that hotel managers are aware of the importance of considering their strategy when measuring performance. However, very few of them put this ideology into practice, as performance measurement in the hospitality industry is still predominantly financially based. The research has shown Bullen and Rockart 's Critical Success Factor can be combined with a performance measurement framework to ensure strategy is clearly integrated in the chosen key performance measures.
Being a conceptual paper, the main limitation of this document is that it is based on secondary sources only. Hence, the validity of the arguments and conclusions is not proven by empirical evidence or by primary research.
This paper presents performance measurement from a strategic perspective for hospitality organisations. It provides an insight of how hotel managers can ensure key performance measures are aligned with their strategy.
Keywords - Hospitality Industry, Performance measurement, Strategy, Critical Success Factors.
Paper type - Literature Review.
The increase in competition rivalry and in the access to information (Atkinson and Brander Brown, 2001; Neely, 1996), the increasing cleverness of customers, the acceleration of globalisation and sophistication of management practices (Eccles, 1991; Kaplan and Norton, 1992) lead organisations of various industries to review and improve their traditional performance measurement methods (Eccles, 1991; Kaplan and Norton, 1992). It is also recognised that the performance measures of an organisation should be linked with its strategic goals and with its competitive environment (Fitzgerald et al. 1991; Lynch and Cross, 1995; Kaplan and Norton, 1996) as well as that, nowadays, organisations need to focus on the customer, rather than on the product (Kaplan and Norton, 1996).
In response to these arising trends and events, many frameworks have been developed in order to facilitate organisations' performance measurement (Atkinson and Brander Brown, 2001; Eccles, 1991). However, research has shown that the hospitality industry in general still focuses on traditional performance measures (Brander Brown and McDonnell, 1995; Brotherton and Shaw, 1996; Harris and Brander Brown, 1998). The traditional performance measures are financial measures and are no longer adequate since they present many weaknesses, as their emphasis on the short-term and on past performance (Fitzgerald and Moon, 1996; Kaplan and Norton, 1992, Lynch and Cross, 1995; Phillips, 1999). They are recognised to be misleading for continuous improvement and innovation, which are of growing importance with nowadays competition and changing environment (Kaplan and Norton, 1992). Hence, to still rely on financial measures can be misinforming for organisations as they will not be apt to adequately measure their strategy (which presents a long-term vision of the business). Though, it has been shown that to implement a strategically focused performance measurement framework in hospitality organisations is possible (Brander Brown and McDonnell, 1995). The generic literature is plentiful about performance measurement and how it should relate to strategy. There seems to be also a lot of information on hospitality performance measurement and on strategy. However, apart than applying the balanced scorecard framework to hospitality businesses, the literature on how performance measurement and strategy relate to each other seems scarce. The aim of this paper is then to establish the relationship between performance measurement and strategy, for hotel organisations.
The article is initiated by defining performance measurement, generically and in a hospitality context, portraying its particular characteristics. It then defines strategy, and outlines different performance measurement frameworks that link with strategy. Finally, the use of the critical success factors is proposed as an intermediary to effectively link strategy and performance measures.
Firstly, it is important to have a clear idea of what performance measurement is. In fact, a lot of definitions are attributed to performance, and no one prevails (Neely, 2002; De Cieri and Fenwick, 2002). The main reason is that its meaning varies in every organisation since it is mainly defined by the process that is adopted to measure it (Neely, 2002a). Among all the definitions, it is usually expressed as a set of "parameters or indicators", and often related with "effectiveness and efficiency" (Neely, 2002a:71). Many authors agree that, being a central element of the managerial process (Haktanir, 2005), performance measurement should support competitive advantage (De Cieri and Fenwick, 2002; Haktanir, 2005; Harris and Mongiello, 2001; Phillips, 1999). Neely et al. (1995:80) define performance measurement as the "process of quantifying action, where measurement is the process of quantification and the action leads to performance". It is also defined as the process where it is ensured that activities and productivity match the "organisation 's goals" (De Cieri and Fenwick, 2002:5227). Hence, performance measurement is a means to assess the extent an organisation meets its objectives, using specific key measures.
The key measures of performance have evolved through time and through the progression of the businesses general environment. Indeed, as performance measurement was traditionally focused on the financial portion of the business, its effectiveness is now widely criticised (e.g. Fitzgerald and Moon, 1996; Kaplan and Norton, 1992; Neely, 1999) because, amongst others, of the increasing rivalry and of the strength of information technologies (Eccles, 1991; Neely, 1999). Recardo and Wade (2001:13) argue that performance measures should be separated into two different categories: the "trailing" performance measures, which give information about the past operations, and the "leading" performance measures, presenting information on future potential of achievement or failure. Also, Neely (2002) proposes three perspectives to measure performance. In fact, not only the accounting, but also the marketing and the operation perspective should be taken into account when measuring performance (Neely, 2002a). The important feature in these ideas is that performance measurement should now be designed to cover various aspects of the organisation giving information about past results and potential trends.
The hotel industry presents many characteristics that influence the way performance measurement is conducted and makes it so important. Indeed, as Harris (1999) discusses, three types of businesses are combined and interrelated in hotel businesses. As the rooms present a pure type of service, i.e. intangible, the beverage function can be compared to a retailing service, since the stock is stored and directly sold to the client without modification. Finally, the food activity represents a production service as the raw materials are stoked and transformed before being sold (Harris, 1999). Hence, the performance measures chosen must reflect the multidimensional nature of the hospitality product and services. Furthermore, features of this specific service business must also be taken into account when measuring performance. The perishability aspect of the service (the fact that an unsold room is lost forever) and the fluctuating demand increases the need for measuring past performance and for forecasting. Its intangibility, simultaneity and heterogeneity (the service can greatly vary from a customer to another, according to its needs or to the employee serving him) greatly enhance the complexity and importance of measuring customer satisfaction and employee performance (Harris, 1999).
Another factor that will influence the way performance is measured in a hospitality organisation is its cost structure, which varies between and within hospitality organisations according to the type of services and products offered (Harris, 1999). A luxury hotel or restaurant, for example, will have a major part of its costs in the location, in the building itself, that is its fixed costs will be high. Consequently, it will need to achieve a greater sales volume to reach the break-even point. On the other hand, a lower scale business would have fewer costs in the infrastructure. As most of the costs will be variable, it will require a lower sales volume to achieve the break-even point, but the profits will not grow as fast since the variable costs for each transaction will be superior (Harris, 1999). High fixed cost businesses will be more market oriented, whether the low fixed cost ones will be more cost oriented. Consequently, organisations with different cost structures should measure performance differently and have distinct strategies and goals to maximise profits.
The different type of businesses within an organisation, the particular features of services and the variable cost structure lead to the idea that a one-fits-all model for performance measurement cannot exist in hospitality. Each organisation is shaped differently and must adapt its performance measures to the characteristics of the business. Therefore, the way performance measurement is conducted, as a means to measure success, must be must individually designed and seriously taken into account. As Haktanir (2006) indicates, performance measures are a means to identify strong and poor areas of performance, and enable managers to develop improved plans for the future. Plans are often synonym of strategy. Before discussing how the strategy of an organisation can be transposed into performance measures, it is important to have a clear vision of what strategy exactly is.
The literature on strategy and its generic definition is various and more then plentiful.
Types of strategies are defined as corporate, business or financial (Olsen et al. 1998). Others divide competitive strategies in "overall cost, leadership, differentiation and focus" (Porter, 2004:35). Even though many definitions exist, authors agree to envision strategy as a long timescale plan, implying a structural change that determines a direction for an enterprise (Bennett, 1996, Johnson et al. , 2006, Mintzberg et al, 2003 and Pearson, 1999). Strategy can also be seen as a "plan" (Glueck, 1980:9, Recardo and Wade, 2001:35, Mintzberg, 1994:23), a "pattern" (Mintzberg 1978:934), a "position" (Hofer and Schendel, 1978:4, Porter, 1985:1) or a "map" (Recardo and Wade, 2001:17). Porter (1996:64) summarizes properly the many definitions by stating that "the essence of strategy is choosing to perform activities differently than rivals do".
Mintzberg (1994) acknowledges strategy both as a plan and a pattern. Strategy is a plan when seen as a direction for the future and a pattern when there is a regularity of actions over time that is, for example, a hotel who always offers the most expensive rooms in its market. He also expresses that strategies can be intended, realised or emergent. Often, from the intended strategy, part of it will be unrealised while some of it will be fully realised (deliberate strategy). Adding to the deliberate strategy will be the emergent strategy, which is the pattern of the organisation, evolving out of its past, that was not explicitly projected. The deliberate and the emergent strategies will then form the realised strategy of the organisation (Mintzberg, 1994). The question that can be asked is whether an organisation should let the emergent strategies modify the original intended one; or should it welcome them and let the original strategy be modified? The answer seems to lie in the ability of an organisation to adapt itself to its environment and to be able to cope with the patterns evolving from the organisation 's past. Then, if part of the strategy can emerge from itself, as Porter (1996:75) asked, "why do so many companies fail to have a strategy?" The rapid evolution in the environment and in the competition surely presents a threat, but the major intimidation comes from inside the organisation, as a consistent strategy is often "undermined" by the "desire to grow" and by an erroneous image of competition (Porter, 1996:75).
The literature on strategy specific to the hospitality industry is weakly developed (Evans, 2005). As for other industries, the strategy of a hospitality organisation is greatly influenced by external factors, often viewed as the PEST environments (political, economical, social and technological) surrounding it. The nature of the strategy also depends on the structure of the organisation, as well as on the desired performance (Teare et al. , 1998). As Teare et al. indicate, the factors influencing the organisation affect equally the strategy and the structure of a hospitality business. Both these elements must be aligned and well understood to reach "company performance and guest satisfaction" (Teare et al. , 1998:66).
In hospitality, the strategy formulation process of most businesses begins by adjusting and updating their goals according to observed performance in the main areas, accomplished results and priorities (Storey and Teare, 1991). As Okmus specifies in the International Encyclopedia of Hospitality Management (2005), strategy implementation (to put the strategy into action) is arduous for hospitality organisations than its formulation, which seems to be caused by the misunderstanding of the environment and the competition as stated by Porter. Whether strategy is seen as the creation of a competitive advantage, of opportunities or of a long-term direction (Johnson et al. , 2005), its essence is to perform activities different than competitors do (Porter, 1996).
Now that performance measurement and strategy have been defined and discussed for the hospitality industry, the next question to be answered is how performance measurement can help define or measure strategy. As managers in several industries are revising the way they measure performance (Eccles, 1991), several models and frameworks have been developed by researchers and companies, attempting to match performance measurement and strategy (Thomas et al. , 1999). In the following section, performance measurement models such as the Results and Determinant model, Performance Prism, and Balance Scorecard are discussed in the relevance of their application to relate performance measurement and strategy for hospitality organisations.
Fitzgerald et al. (1991) view performance measurement as a key factor to the implementation of a successful strategy. They propose a model specifically for the service industry, combining financial and non-financial measures into a simple table with six dimensions: competitiveness and financial performance being the results, and quality of service, flexibility, resource utilisation and innovation as the determinants. These dimensions are all related with several measures, which managers can choose, according to the competitive environment, the structure of the organisation and the strategy. Upon the criticism of this framework, Brignall (2002) brings the taught that an increase in one determinant might lead to a decrease in one of the results. For example, if an investment is required to improve the quality of the service (determinant), it will inevitably have a negative impact on the financial performance (result). Hence, even though the model considers the link between the dimensions as the results are dependant of the determinants, it can give an incorrect view of the business performance in the short term. Also, as many measures are proposed for each dimension, it might be confusing for managers to choose which one reflects better their strategy. On the other hand, this model seems to allow a quick and simple view of the overall business performance, and supports the idea that the achieved results are according to past performance of other determinants (Neely et al. , 2000).
Introduced by Neely (Kennerley and Neely, 2002:154) the performance prism, a new framework, is an attempt to "focus on the deficiencies of other existing frameworks". The performance prism is a three-dimensional framework with five different facets. The "stakeholder satisfaction" and the "stakeholder contribution" are the top and bottom, and are surrounded by the strategies, the processes and the capabilities. The framework questions the assumption that the performance measures should derive from a chosen strategy. It hence proposes to begin by defining the major stakeholders of the organisation and their prerequisites, and to consider if the organisation has the schemes to provide their satisfaction. Then, the organisation should determine which processes could support it, which are its capabilities and finally which contribution is required from the stakeholders. The implementation of the prism is also eased by a catalogue of numerous performance measures for each facet of the prism (Kennerley and Neely, 2002). This framework seems not to be criticised in the literature, probably due to its recent emergence, and there appears to be no evidence of its use in hospitality businesses. However, it seems that this model fit hospitality businesses, as being a service industry, the importance of employee, clients, syndicates and pressure groups satisfaction is crucial. Furthermore, the concept of the framework appears to be easily applicable since it indicates which questions must be answered. These simple questions (as who are and what do our stakeholders require and need) merit reflection and greatly influence business performance.
Presented by Kaplan and Norton (1996), the balanced scorecard is from far the most renowned and accepted performance measurement framework, principally in America (Brignall, 2002, Neely et al. , 2000). As skills and competition have evolved over time, the customer is now more important than the product, and managers should not rely only on financial measures, which give a short-term overview of a business. (Kaplan and Norton, 1992). The balanced scorecard is therefore based on the assumption that companies relying on short-term financial measures restrain the implementation and development of their strategy (Kaplan and Norton, 1992). The proposed framework enables managers to link strategic goals (long-term vision, operational measures) with financial measures (Kaplan and Norton, 1996). The balanced scorecard proposes four perspectives: financial, customer, innovation and learning and internal business. These four perspectives are interrelated within the scorecard and each of them has goals to be achieved, determined by the managers, with the according measures to evaluate them. Hence, with its various facets, it provides a balanced view of the business and puts strategy and vision in the centre of the framework (Kaplan and Norton, 1992, 1996). Some criticism of the balanced scorecard includes the fact that it neglects important stakeholders of environmental and social matters, which are nowadays gaining importance in public interest (Brignall, 2002). Also, some authors believe that it is the most utilised measure, not just because of its efficiency, but especially as it has been highly advertised (Neely et al., 2000), and that if not implemented properly, the balanced scorecard can give too much information to be able to analyze it efficiently (Broadbent, 1999).
Lynch and Cross (1995) consider that a performance measurement framework must respond to three criteria in order to be effective. Firstly, the "measures must link operations to strategic goals", secondly the "system has to integrate financial and non-financial information" and thirdly, the system 's value lies in its ability to "focus all businesses activities on customer requirements" (Lynch and Cross, 1995:6). The three frameworks discussed above all present financial and non-financial and are designed to meet customer requirements. Also, even though not stated explicitly for the results and determinants model, theoretically, the strategy should be reflected in the chosen performance measures of all three frameworks discussed above. In fact, the balance scorecard puts strategy at the centre of its components (Kaplan and Norton, 1996), and it is also one of the main principles of the performance prism (Neely, 2002b). The issue arising is how can a manager ensure that the chosen performance measures reflect perfectly the strategy of its organisation. The above frameworks are designed to do so, but do not explain how the specific measures must be chosen. In other words, even though a company chooses to adopt the balanced scorecard as a performance measurement framework for example; how will it ensure that the measures in the 'boxes' completely manifest the strategy?.
First introduced in the sixties the Critical Success Factors (CSF) method has been adapted and popularised by Rockart in 1979 (Lynch and Cross, 1995). CSFs are defined as the few "key area of activity" in which satisfactory results are imperative for a manager or an organisation to reach its goals (Bullen and Rockart, 1981:3), hence for the achievement of the strategy. It is a solution to the common problem of defining which data is needed by a general manager to effectively manage the business (Rockart, 1979). The critical success factors are useful for managers to determine the information they need and to help an organisation in its general planning process (Bullen and Rockart, 1981). Hence, a company can use the critical success factors to transform its goals, deriving from the strategy and objectives of the organization, into performance measures (Bullen and Rockart, 1981). However, the determination of the different CSFs stays subjective. In fact, what is a critical factor and what is not varies upon managers, and upon their goals and perspectives (Rockart, 1979).
One of the few hospitality-related studies revises the significance of main CSF of UK corporate hotel companies concludes that almost all CSF chosen by managers are relevant (95% of them) (Brotherton, 2004). These findings assert the subjectivity of the CSFs choice, but principally also support the relevance of its applicance to to the industry. For example, if one of the goals of a hotel is to become a renowned brand in its sector, one of the CSFs to ensure the achievement of this goal could be to provide persuasive marketing. One of the measures to support this CSF could be to measure the rate of repeat business (Geller, 1984). By tracking the repeat business, the organisation can take the pulse of the market, that is to know if it is saturated or not. If the market reveals to be saturated, the marketing budget can be diminished and reinvested into the quality of the service delivery, for example. By doing so, the company will invest for customers to come back, not for getting new customers, and will still reach the goal of being a notorious brand. The CSFs could hence be a solution to effectively transpose strategy of an organisation into performance measures, by acting as an intermediary between both.
Figure 1 proposes a path enabling the translation of the strategy into performance measures, through different levels of the organisation. Whether hospitality organisations opt for a corporate, business or financial strategy (Olsen et al. , 1998) this proposition can be used to effectively translate the strategy into performance measures. The first step should be to ensure that managers in the organisation have an adequate image of competition, since an erroneous view of it is one of the main reasons why many companies fail to have a strategy (Porter, 1996:75). Once the strategy has been put into different goals, as proposed by Bullen and Rockart (1981) each individual manager should be asked to define the critical success factors of their own department, then gather and study them to get the organisation 's CSFs. To solicit all the managers to determine the CSFs will enable the organisation to ensure that the strategy is well understood by all of them. It is also an opportunity to identify emergent strategies (Mintzberg, 1994) as managers will have different perspectives of it, and may see opportunities that were not considered at first.
Once the CSFs established, they can be easily transposed into performance measures. In order for the performance measures to adequately represent the strategy, it must be ensured that "trailing" as well as "leading" indicators are chosen (Fitzgerald et al. , 1991; Recardo and Wade, 2001) so that information past results and potential trends are present, and that the three type of activities (service, retail and production) are represented. Furthermore, it appears clear in the proposed diagram that as the strategy is being transposed from one level to another, what is being measured becomes narrower. However, if "what you measure is what you get" (Kaplan and Norton, 1992), managers must ensure to cover all aspects of their goals in the chosen performance measures, as well as all dimensions of performance (financial, human, organisational, etc.).
The different frameworks proposed demonstrate that performance measurement can also be seen from different angles. In the performance prism, Neely (2002b) sees it from a stakeholders' perspective, in the results and determinants model, Fitzgerald and al. (1991) perceive it as determinants that bring results, and in the balanced scorecard, Kaplan and Norton (1992) observe it with a focus on strategy and vision.
To ensure that all the aspects of the strategy are present in the chosen performance measures, the proposal following this exploration is that no matter which framework (if any) is chosen to present an overview of the performance, other frameworks should be studied in regards to the organisation. In other words, managers should inspire themselves from what is proposed in the different frameworks. This will allow them to have a broader image of what the strategy implies, and will allow expressing strategy in term of measures from different perspectives. The chosen performance measures can them be implemented in the framework that represent the best the organisation 's goals, in order to be able to have an overview of the business, which can be returned to the corporate level, with the intention of giving a feedback on the achievement of goals, objectives and strategy.
This article aimed to determine the relationship between performance measures and strategy for hotel organisations. It has been shown that performance measures should reflect the strategy of an organisation (Teare et al., 1998). Furthermore, to deepen the understanding of the link between both elements, a scheme has been proposed to effectively link strategy and performance measures, using the critical success factors method as an intermediary. This article hence has a great implication for hotel managers, as it provides them with tools to have a broader perspective of how to relate strategy and indicators of performance. It is in the point of view of the author that the proposed scheme is theoretically applicable to the industry. However, being based on a literature review, the arguments proposed in this article are rather suggestive than conclusive. In fact, the drawn conclusions are from the writer 's perspective thus subjective to criticism. In order to assess their validity, primary research could be conducted, aiming to test the proposed pattern.
