Schematic knowledge means information we have naturally acquired in social life and general knowledge we consider common situation or behaviours towards every certain event. For example as schematic knowledge we know supermarkets is the place to buy foods or life commodities and customers have to pay for products at the cashing desk as common knowledge.
Endophoric reference signifies either anaphoric reference or cataphoric reference. While it is related to language within the context of situation it is not situational reference but textual reference for example anaphoric reference refers to preceding text and cataphoric reference refers to following text.
Schema identifies events happening when you are checking in at the airport for example you go to the checking in desk and show a passport and e-tickets or proof of your air tickets. You put your luggage on the conveyor belt and are asked if your luggage has anything dangerous or if someone has asked you to carry something. You are asked whether you prefer window or aisle seat on the aircraft. You are given boarding pass and your passport back and get told the boarding gate number and closing time.
Frame shows characteristics in the situation for instance checking in desk, passport, e-tickets, luggage, conveyor belt or boarding pass.
Script means actual actions customer might be expected to do for example  'show', 'be asked contents of luggage', 'choose seat', 'get passport back and boarding pass' and 'leave'.
The underlined items are examples of anaphoric reference as they refer backwards in the text in other words the pronominal reference; it refers back to this card while he refers back to the presiding officer. The polling station and the presiding officer are a part of the parliamentary election schema. Our schematic knowledge tells us that parliamentary elections take place at the polling station where the presiding officer watches over events.
The underlined 'one' refers to a nominal substitution for a ballot paper.
The underlined do is a verbal substitution for 'vote at this election' and so is a clausal substitution for the previous part, 'If you have ... at this election'.
Throughout the text it can be seen quite a lot of repetition for a ballot paper. The ballot in line thirteen refers to the ballot paper with a nominal ellipsis. The polling station, the presiding officer are also repeated three times in the text.
The above extracted sentence has a verbal ellipsis after we are. The missing element can be considered as revealing startling gaps in the cultural knowledge of young British adults.
A discourse analysis focused on deep level of sentence in other words cohesion and coherence in texts. On the other hand grammatical analysis can be only focused on surface of sentences. For example the genre theory will make deeper interpretation of social contexts and text structure. In addition socially orientated perspective looks at social identity in particular intercultural communication.
The text seems not to show abstract clearly as it is neither having title nor exactly summarising the story however 'well', the beginning of the sentence can be considered as a signal that the narrative is about to commence. Furthermore the following sentence, 'Gabriel who 's... the point' can be abstract as it is showing a main fact which is about relationship between Gabriel and rugger bugger type man. In addition 'that 's beside the point' sounds as if the narrative is going to start.
Orientation seems to start from 'Gabriel who 's ... in line one to the end of the first paragraph, ... rugger bugger type' or can be the first sentence of the second paragraph,  'so eight pints later... like this'. Although the beginning sentence of orientation might be also abstract it includes information about main characters, Gabriel and the bloke. The following sentences starting from  'she met...' in line two show exact time or place of the story and further information about the bloke.
Goal in the text can be to succeed a hundred quid bill to curry house by herself as it says in the line ten.
Complicating action is as follows. Her mates are already gone and she just met the blokes the night before. While she honestly has no money the manager threatens her and tries to call the police.
The problem is solved as blokes come out from the hiding place at the end. In addition what happened in the curry house is not a fact but a story which the blokes are just joking around with her.
Coda can be seen the last part of the text, 'Its not a ... tell about him.' Although it seems not to tell the readers or hearers exact lessons it still showing the story is at the end.
To sum up text three is clearly well structured according to the genre categories as it includes all elements of the categories.
Text: Ronald McDonald.
From the Descriptive perspective firstly the frame of the text is structured with main headline, main text with several sub-headlines, illustrations drawn next to some paragraphs, an information box with an illustration, the following information box at the end. The text is overall looked as texts divided in each small paragraph. It is also a portrait text separated into left and right parts in the middle. In addition the topic is being presented in a fairly informal way with plain words. It is also written rather persuasively and comically for example it says 'Ronald lies to children' . It is also possibly overstating in sub-headlines such as 'killing animals' or 'harming your health'. The preferred reading is to show various negative aspects of Ronald McDonald and to spread these ideas throughout society. Finally the ideal reader of the text are children who love fast foods such as McDonalds, their parents, people who criticise McDonalds food industry and agree with ideas on the text and people who have not known facts in the text before.
Next social values are interpreted based on discourse features of the text from the following four points which are image, vocabulary, grammar and genre. Firstly the text of image is well organised visually by using several illustrations. The text uses slightly large formats overall while rather small formats are used in information boxes. In addition addressed of publishers at the end is a good example of REAL position. The combination of visual and written modes encourages people to look at the text more.
The text includes numerous negative vocabularies such as damaging, killing or harming from the sub-headlines. It also uses plain words instead of academic words. It can be seen some lexical cohesion. As an example of elegant repetition natural forests in the main text implies the earth in the sub-headline. In an information box on the middle of the right side, clown refers to Ronald as synonyms in the context. In addition a sentence, 'DON'T BE TRICKED BY THE 'CLOWN'!' is considered a strong statement of the writer as it is written with capital letters and inverted commas. The effect of negative vocabularies choice encourages pessimistic image of Ronald McDonald. Overall the text tries to avoid becoming a boring text while using lexical cohesion. At the same time it enables to attract reader 's interests more.
Throughout the text present tense is used while modal verbs cannot be seen. As effects it is interpreted that these features emphasise the absolute truth statement. It often includes passive constructions for example 'natural forests are cut down for space...' or 'millions of chickens, cows and pigs are cruelly imprisoned...'. The effect is that Ronald is predominantly foregrounded as it says Ronald diagonally on the left top corner in each paragraph. The agent also has a greater thematic role throughout the text. In addition sub-headlines uses nominalisation such as 'harming your health' or 'robbing the poor'. It enables to avoid repeating the obvious agent and make clear visible text.
The text is a categorised genre as not only notice that McDonald has numerous negative points but also advertisement about statements by a NETWORK FOR KIDS AGAINST MCDONALD'S. Therefore the text provides advertising text style such as precise syntaxes and idioms while it is a type of notice as the mixing of genres.
The third interpretation is associated with social context in the text. The text is a part of the following social frameworks, environments, business, employments, health, foods, family and education. We need to have acquired some social knowledge as follows in order to understand these social frameworks. Junk foods do not provide better nutrition while the fast food industry spread all over the world. People cannot help going to McDonalds because of its convenience, reasonable prices and friendly homey atmosphere in the place. Children would rather eat fast foods than vegetables because of the taste. A number of big companies in the world including McDonalds gains cheap lands or ingredients from developing countries and damage the environments. The industry is still strong position in the business world while having huge criticism.
Finally deconstructive interpretation of the text is discussed. The text seems to be concluded with contradiction for the preferred reading. The text says 'It 's up to us to think for ourselves and to get together to make the world a better place' at the end of the information box. It is fairly clear that the text shows terrible criticisms for the McDonalds business and social drawbacks by the industry overall. However the sentence basically says that we should establish better society by ourselves which should include everyone including writers of the text and employees for McDonalds. Here it seems to be a contradiction because the text is supposed to be in an opposite position from the McDonalds industry however it also suggests cooperation with the enemy, McDonalds at the same time. Therefore it seems somehow to undermine the preferred reading.
To sum up CDA is a way to consider social situation while analysing texts. It makes me realise that texts are strongly associated with social and institutional contexts within society. Therefore CDA enables readers to provide deep understanding and some questions about social ethics by finding contradictions in texts.
