This paper presents an analysis of two texts which have been chosen as interesting from a pedagogical view. The present IELTS exam requires that candidates write either a formal or an informal letter. By comparing and analysing the texts it should be possible to identify a prototypical letter and how choices realised in the texts achieve their goals. As Eggins (2004) states, this kind of contrastive analysis is useful because patterns of choice are more easily identified.
Genre and Register theory can enable the linguist to both predict and deduce the likely meanings and linguistic features which are 'at risk' in a text. Genres are realised through structural patterns, or stages whereas the different contexts manifest in the variables of Register. This paper will therefore analyse the texts' schematic structure to highlight how closely they conform to the genre and use Register theory to focus on how the writers convey underlying meaning. Finally the texts are analysed from a pragmatic viewpoint to see to what extent maxims of politeness are followed. The paper concludes with the implications for teaching exam students.
If we can determine what the social or communicative purpose of a text is, we should also be able to identify its genre. (Martin 2001; Eggins and Martin 1997 pp236-237; Eggins, 2004; Bhatia, 1993). The social purpose of text B is interactional - a term normally used to refer to spoken discourse to describe the maintaining of social relations. Text A on the other hand is transactional, the purpose is to inform and request someone to do something. Although Swales (1990) refers to the overarching category of 'letters' as a 'multigeneric generalisation', when the purpose is identifiable they can be viewed as a specific genre. Thus from a top-down approach we can say that both texts belong to a multigeneric form of correspondence, though they belong to different specific genres of a) Letters of Complaint and b) Rejection or 'Dear John' Letters. It seems likely that the first genre 'a' occurs more commonly in formal letters as in text A, whilst in text B a rejection of a friendship must logically be informal. Paltridge categorises formal and personal letters as two genres, interestingly, he cites research as showing that the same genre can differ greatly in its linguistic patterns' and vice versa. (Biber cited in Paltridge, 1996. p237-239).
Fairclough (2003) suggests that social transformations change genres and that this change is manifested as a difference in the combination of genres. One social change of the last 50 or so years has been the advent of computer technology use within organisations. Formerly, correspondence or communication was generally a one to one interaction between business and client; today much of the administration and logging of correspondence is often complicated by elaborate networks. From email to outsourced customer services, the potential for lost communications is much greater thus possibly giving rise to a new genre, of which text A is an example. This genre (which inevitably forms a genre chain) could be categorized as Correspondence Complaining About Miscommunication. An example of the genre chain of text A might be: whereas such a chain is not likely for text B.
One reason the two texts are identifiable is that they conform to the schematic structure of their genre, although more so in certain stages than others. Painter (2001) states that: "the purpose of a genre determines its shape (...) Thus the structure is not so much an arbitrary prescriptive formula as a facilitating convention." Genres are facilitating because in using and recognising the genre (or the purpose) the reader is freed from the burden of repeatedly creating and understanding new patterns of layout, stages and language (Eggins, 2004). This conformity to a generic type allows us to predict features. In any correspondence one would expect to see a specific layout and functional stages such as Opening, Closing. Furthermore in complaint letters one would expect such stages including:
Situating (including background information), Statement of Problem possibly embedded in reason for correspondence, optional Further Explanation of the problem and/or the background information and optional Request.
It seems that the first two stages could come in either order though Situating is likely to be first, unless the problem is embedded in the reason for writing.
At this point the stages diverge significantly warranting different analyses.
There appears to be a degree of instability in genre definition and classification (Bhatia, 1993; Fairclough, 2003; Paltridge, 1996), however it seems clear the texts differ enough in their communicative purpose to be separate genres. There are a few stages which are common to both and seem obligatory for the category of letter and some for the genre of Complaint letter irrespective of register. The first is that of layout; the position of each part of the initial referencing stage is specific and can be mapped onto a cline of degree of flexibility wherein the recipient 's name in left position is inflexible, but the date, or addresses depending on formality, might be located on the left or right or missing. There is "a question concerning the obligatory nature of these features when writing to a close friend" (Mortensen, 2005). Text A is typed; more referencing information seems probable the more formal the letter whereas text B is handwritten and has only a date. Other stages which are common to both texts and seem obligatory are: Situating and Problem. Using Eggins' (2004) symbols to describe the schematic structure (see appendix 1) we arrive at:
Paltridge (1996) observes virtually the same structure for a formal 'Problem- Solution' letter:
Similar structures for complaint letters have been described as: as a text structure (rather than a genre structure) (Hoey, 2001). And: in complaint letters to the Editor (Hartford, 2004).
Although text A mixes genres (Bhatia, 1993) to include Legal Demand, apart from the 2 nd paragraph, structurally it complies with the prototypical genres. In mixing genre and including this stage, the writer is showing his ultimate authority. Referring to speech, Bakhtin (1997) comments on the diversity of genres, and the role of intonation and genre-mixing in expressing emotional intent, a point which might be pertinent for line 15.
As personal letters are informal with parallels to conversation, the register is more "open" (Hasan, 1996 cited in Mortensen, 2005) thus allowing for more diversity in structure and semantic realisations. Text A should likewise be more constrained in these aspects.
The interpersonal resources will reveal the nature of the relationships between writer and reader, and the attitudes of the writer towards the topic and themselves. In encoding the relationship this metafunction will direct the reader in how to receive the message and therefore defines the role of the reader. According to SFL this is an example of how the text is both product and producer of the context. I suggest it is within the Tenor dimension that the writers make some interesting choices to realise their goals, therefore this dimension will be explored.
The resources which identify Tenor at the context level are affected by 3 dimensions: (Eggins, 2004).
A formal relationship of unequal power would fit all criteria in the right column, whereas that of a close friend would fit all in the left column.
Within both texts there are certainly many examples of how they conform to the formal / informal relationships they encode such as:
But there are also surprising examples in the Tenor.
Line 7 is marked for its direct accusatory style, it reveals the writers attitude of superiority to the recipient (the reason was 'obvious'). The use of 'ignore' and 'good' (line 8) reveals contempt of the recipient. Other resources marked for inconsistency include: lay your hands on/ throw away/ let me know.
These are all too informal for the context thus achieving a patronizing tone.
There is a degree of formality revealed in some phrases such as:
I simply cannot/ you obviously require/ a great many fine novels which might indicate that the writer either belongs to a high social class and/or is older, or is trying to distance herself from agency. There is evidence for the latter. Line 3.i 'obviously' implies that Juliet 's friendship requirements are unreasonable (not Patricia 's fault). Line 4 is presented as a 'fact' implying no choice. The use of others as agents in line 7 furthers the sense of denial of agency. Finally, in the appeal (7i), the use of 'will' and Juliet as the (Hallidayan) 'actor' emphasis Patricia 's attitude that responsibility lies with Juliet whilst Patricia is the 'Theme' and 'Subject'.
As well as looking at language in relation to context and background, pragmatics gives importance to social principles, examining the way social distance directs behaviour in language. Analysing the texts from a pragmatic viewpoint, allows us to see how the distance between speakers affects their linguistic choices as both texts contain face threatening acts (FTA).
The notion of 'Face', proposed as universal by Brown and Levinson, "must be constantly attended to" by participants; it can be "lost, maintained, or enhanced". Negative face is: "the want of every 'competent adult member' that his actions be unimpeded by others;" (ibid, 1987). Positive face describes the need to be liked, to feel part of a group and to have one 's desires shared.
Maxims of cooperation (Grice, 1975) are usually associated with conversational analysis, however they are pertinent to these letters as there is an interactional element between writer and reader although feedback would be delayed. The text writer is aware of the reader and the impact that his/her text could have and therefore would rationally observe the principles of Grice 's maxims (Cameron, 2001). The maxims can be summed up as follows:
In the original request to send the pension to x there was a potential for a negative FTA to the addressees; still, it is a civil servants duty to perform such requests and one supposes that politeness norms were adhered to. However, by not complying with the request, the civil servant performed (what could be interpreted as,) a negative FTA to Fred. Although the FTA is by implication only (the daughter was not paid attention to), his actions were impeded by the Pension Service. In Fred 's response by showing he has the legal right to make the request (line14) he appears to feel free to commit a variety of FTA 's.
In lines 9 to 11 the writer is flouting the maxim of quality. Because the possibilities given are so implausible, the evidence is that he probably does not believe this is the case. Thus the implicature \(or inferred meaning) generated is 'incompetence'. Through our background knowledge or schema regarding offices and civil servants, we recognise the suggested excuses as being preposterous, therefore anyone unable to re-address a letter in an office must be incompetent. Because the writer does not say this directly it is defined as off record, (yet, the reasons he cites are so far-fetched it seems inappropriate to label them thus). According to Searle 's speech acts (cited in Cutting, 2002), lines 9 to 11 are 'indirect' speech acts. The function of Questioning is, it seems, intended as an accusation of incompetence. Perhaps the interrogative form is being used here as the statement form would be a direct accusation. Not only could an accusation be libellous, but it would also fail to convey the deliberate flouting of the quality maxim to produce hyperbole and thus ridicule.
Lines 7i. to 9 are direct speech acts; the loctuionary and illocutionary force are the same (to apportion blame) and thus defined declarative (Searle) or performative (Austin). The perlocutionary force or effect on the reader would be to understand they are being blamed. Even though the maxim of quality is flouted with 'good'; using a positive adjective with a negative meaning is sarcasm, the purpose of which might be to ridicule/ embarrass/express contempt. Line 8 can also be termed an: on record, bald, without redressive action FTA.
Line 12i. is by its very nature an on record, bald, without redressive action FTA. It is both a positive and negative FTA; it is imposing an action on the reader and it is also an indirect ('if') suggestion of incompetence. Although no maxims seem to be obviously flouted in line 15, by referring to the implicature already generated in the letter (incompetence), the writer effects sarcasm with lexis ('usual procedures') normally used to imply efficiency.
Overall, there are 9 FTA 's, 4 of which are bald. This could suggest: great social distance or very little (as in a family fight); and that the power relations are heavily imbalanced. As this correspondence is only the 2 nd in the chain, it seems unusually lacking in politeness strategies. This is probably attributable to the added protection and right afforded Fred by the law.
In contrast, text B contains 1 main, 'painful' positive-face threatening act, but also many politeness strategies. Patricia judges the risk of her FTA to be so 'weighty', that she must begin with (line 3) a positive politeness strategy: "I'm sorry". According to Leech 's maxims (1983) this could be viewed as a Modesty maxim, in which the speaker 'maximises dispraise of self' or that of S ympathy where the speaker maximises sympathy for other. "The Modesty Maxim [is exemplified intrinsically in] apologies". (ibid p132) Another expression which realises this goal is: "I'm afraid' (line 3i). Both phrases are formulaic which brings into question whether Patricia really means it. According to Searle a sincerity condition for an apology is that the speaker "should truly regret it" (cited in Brown and Levinson, 1987). However Cameron (2001) suggests that if the recipient takes it as a real apology it is irrelevant whether it is sincere or not. Additionally we cannot really know the true meaning as we can only assume Patricia 's intentions based on the context. (Leech, 1983).
Distancing theory, first proposed within psychology, states that the bearer of bad news will in some way distance themselves from the recipient. In replies to job applicants this manifests as "more words before the rejection and fewer words before an acceptance." (Ahmed and Bigelow). With text B this is not the case, perhaps because Patricia sees a need to deal with the phone conversation first. This does follow research showing that most personal letters start with a reference to the most recent contact with the other person" (Mahmoud, 2001). We can assume it happened recently and was the last contact. (Ideational and textual resources confirm this).
Strangely the FTA itself (3ii) is done baldly with no redressive action. In fact the opposite, it is emphasised. By possibly flouting the maxim of quantity (there is no locutionary need to add  'simply' and 'obviously') she generates the implicature that Juliet demands too much (as above). The purpose is to provide justification to Patricia 's indirect directive (that Juliet no longer regard her as a friend). Lines 4 to 5 could be seen as both providing justification for Patricia but also as redressive action in the form of positive politeness assuring Juliet that there are other reasons for the FTA. In referring to 'fine novels' Patricia again ministers to Juliet 's positive face; by identifying shared likes she recognises her as an in-group member.
There are 5 more face saving strategies bringing the total to 9, an average of 1 approximately every 15 words. Using Brown and Levinson 's ranking factors (1987), we could conclude that any or all of the following are true:
The analyses reveal to what degree these authentic texts conform to their genre type in both structure and formality. Additionally, we see how the flouting of conversational maxims, use of politeness strategies and lexico-grammatical choices achieve the writer 's purpose and reflect their attitudes. With regard to exam students we need to consider which of these aspects it is useful for them to be aware of and to what degree. The answer depends on the exam tasks.
Typical tasks specify what information the candidate should include but not the degree of formality:
It is interesting to note the degree of similarity there is to the genre analysis. Evidently a student does not need to know the layout conventions or openings. Although much of the structural organization has been given, some awareness of and practice in the schema structure including closings would be very useful. As there is such a close correspondence of both structure and content (complaint), it would be interesting and useful for students to analyse authentic letters (Burns, 1990). Using discovery techniques and instruction, formulaic phrases could be highlighted. Such as those above for politeness strategies (I'm afraid) or introducing topics, ('I'm writing about..').
Both formal and informal letters could be used to help students identify aspects of register and predict the register used from the given context. However, taking the analysed texts as examples of different registers, we see that there is no clear divide of formality. Therefore students need to be aware of the cline that exists and could be helped by mapping phrases/lexis onto it. The more awareness they have in this the better; as Painter says (2001), the tenor dimension is extremely difficult for students to 'navigate'.
Despite claims that textbook material is inadequate and does not reflect real language (Badovi-Harlig et al.), in this case it seems that because the exam task is realistic, so is the exam teaching material. Any backwash created by the exam could have useful applications in the real world. To sum up, an analysis such as this is a constructive pedagogic tool to sensitise educators; however it is doubtful that students need to be aware of, for example, FTA 's. From insights gained, a teacher should therefore be mindful of what will be useful such as: exponents of functions, or notions of politeness (providing an explanation for a rejection), and restrict themselves to teaching these.
