The question of grammar instruction has always been central, yet controversial to ELT. The emergence of methods such as the Audiolingual, the Natural Approach, Communicative Language Teaching, and more recently, the Task-Based Learning, have challenged traditional approaches. This, in turn, has affected teachers' attitude to grammar instruction and their use of coursebooks.
This essay begins with a short reflection on grammar teaching as a foundation for my approaches to instruction. It will describe the learners in my teaching environment, their needs and difficulties with the Present Perfect tense. Analysis of similarity, contrast and relevance to my classroom context will follow between Reward Pre-Intermediate (1994), Cutting Edge Pre-Intermediate (2001) and English Grammar in Use-Intermediate (1994). The essay will conclude a flexible, eclectic mix of elements from all books would best suit my learners' needs. Details of preferred advantages to my classroom context will be added along the coursebook analysis.
Grammar is concerned with how meanings are built up (Bloor, 1995). It translates linguistic components into meaningful messages of communication. Hewings, A. and M. (2005) confirm that 'understanding grammar is a part of successful learning'. They explain through knowledge of grammar learners are enabled to express themselves with sophistication, especially in written contexts and genres.
These arguments briefly convey my belief of the importance of grammar teaching. My most recent teaching context has involved predominantly adolescents from diverse backgrounds, at pre-intermediate to intermediate levels. Harmer clarifies that 'one of the key issues in adolescence ... is the search for individual identity, and this search provides the key challenge for this age group' (2001, p. 39). I need to take in consideration challenging factors that characterize my young students, such as.
A priority for me is to engage my learners' attention and allow them to use their high potential for learning, creativity and commitment (Harmer, 2001) - which is why the jungle path method is suitable in this context.
At times I teach monolingual classes - the benefit here is that learners can sometimes help each other in their L1, which saves time. In multilingual classes, on the other hand, the pace of learning is not smooth which slows the process and affects the group dynamics. As a teacher I have to multi-task in addressing all L1 transfers - an example is my concept-checking in both Russian and Persian during a grammar activity with Kazakh and Arab students.
Another challenge in my working context is the expectations of students: I find many adolescents not motivated enough to learn English beyond the 'plateau effect'(Lightbrown and Spada, 2006). In addition, a frequent characteristic I observe in teenage students is their belief of being competent at language theory, which makes them unwilling to go through practice activities, even though they struggle with errors. Sometimes they directly ask that they do not study grammar in class. Since language is viewed as a system of communication and grammar conveys meanings (Hewings, A. & M., 2005), a focus on form will make one 's speech intelligible which will facilitate the comprehension of meaning. As a result, I choose to provide them with tasks that focus on meaning as well as form, so as to prevent fossilization. Another multi-tasking ability is needed here - ensuring a high level of motivation is maintained with personalized, interactive materials.
One point of difficulty arising from my teaching context is the use of the Present Perfect (PP) tense (vs. the Past Simple). It presents a difficulty to all my students and the obvious reason for it is the interference of the learners' L1 in their interlanguage (Swan, 2001).
It is useful here to take a snapshot view of the place of PP and past simple tenses in the L1 structures of my students - all examples have been evident in their performance in class:
Through the inherent link of the Indo-European languages, learners from Western Europe are relatively familiar with the structure of PP. Time relations in German, Spanish, French and Italian are similar to those in English, especially in form, e.g. their equivalents of the PP are formed with the infinitive 'to have' + past participle, in some cases 'to be' + past participle, which is also the case with Bulgarian, for instance. In all of them, however, the PP has a different usage;.
German uses Present and Past tenses to express PP meanings (How long do you live here?);.
French and Italian use the PP form to express past meanings (They have watched many videos last week); the PP in Italian refers to the recent past;.
Spanish uses the present tense in place of PP (It is a whole day that we wait for them) and its PP form functions with time adverbials (Last year she 's travelled to Spain);.
Russian, on the other hand, has no PP tense and uses the present simple instead;.
Arabic also lacks the PP, it is replaced by the past simple or present tense for duration (I work/working five hours now);.
Chinese is particularly challenging as it does not have a well-structured classification of grammar but relies on context, intonation and word order to convey meaning. This presents learners with a harder obstacle;.
Two common facts for speakers of all these languages is (1) they have difficulty in establishing a relevance of PP to the present time, and (2) they use the present simple with for and since, which causes most learners to say I study English for 2 years. (Swan, 2001).
Interestingly, the above findings stand as a testimony that a language and its usage are a reflection of the thinking and cultural heritage of a nation.
A multi-layered coursebook is based on 'pragmatic eclecticism' (Harmer, 2001).
Reward Pre-Intermediate has a multi-syllabus, which includes a focus on grammar-function and vocabulary, alternates the four main skills, and views each lesson within a topical context. The syllabus of Cutting Edge covers an extensive classification of grammar, vocabulary, functions, plus separate sections for the four skills, speaking being made part of an authentic task - that is why it is more multi-layered than Reward. An overall look at both coursebooks shows the visibly more attractive design of Cutting Edge.
In both books the PP is well suited in the middle of the syllabus due to its higher complexity and medium frequency of use (Thornbury, 1999).
Both coursebooks use standard English 'that is internationally acceptable in formal contexts' (Hewings, 2005). Relevance to the present is not often established in American English so Did you do your homework? or I just came home would be considered correct. Although neither of the books makes reference to American usage, students should be aware that past simple may take the function of PP in American English. The target audience and the acceptability of language usage should be considered when choosing the right form (Swan, 2005) - considering my students' interests, I would briefly teach the American usage of PP.
In order for learners to appreciate the  'systematic relationships that exist between form, meaning, and use' (Nunan, 1998), context becomes a significant factor in drawing their attention and engaging their interest. It conveys the speaker 's meaning, which is why the more context there is, the less grammar is needed (Thornbury, 1999). Palmer, F. (1987) confirms context also plays an important role in determining the use of PP or past simple tense. E.g. I made a chocolate cake and I've made a chocolate a cake both began in the past but context will show learners the latter possibly indicates the cake is ready to be eaten.
In Reward, the existing context of the lesson provides a good lead-in before the PP is presented in a box. A disadvantage of the approach is that students are asked to read the grammar box by themselves. In reality, younger students are not happy with reading information from a box. A more natural method of focusing on the PP would be to elicit it from the generative situation provided in the beginning of the lesson, i.e. inductively. If time is not enough, a deductive approach will still be valuable with the teacher 's use of the board, time lines, clarification, concept-checking. Although the 1994 edition of Reward may have been updated several times by now, it visibly lacks in more authentic language use than Cutting Edge. The context is well set in the first half of the lesson, the examples and exercises describe the use of PP, but overall the material lacks samples of natural dialogues - a disadvantage to my students.
In Cutting Edge, the lesson is 3 even times as long and interspersed with activities - activities that 'dramatize the relationship between grammatical items and the discoursal contexts in which they occur' (Nunan, 1998). The contextualization of the target language is stronger, more naturalistic and closer to real-life situations.
A generative situation leads to a grammar box that outlines major features of the PP. In contrast to Reward, the approach is inductive, students are not given rules but sentences with timelines that clarify the difference between PP and past simple. A second grammar box appears a page later and highlights the main functions of the PP by prompting questions. The meaning and function of the tense is thus elicited which, with Reward, most likely would need to be initiated by the teacher.
The controlled exercises that follow in Reward may appear too controlled, so substituting, replacing or shortening some or even all of them would be productive as well. The last few activities of the lesson seem to aim at a more authentic use but they are in fact still restricted - students are asked to speak or write about a specific text and to use a given structure of sentences, which would not give them creativity nor develop fluency. Those exercises can be modified or replaced as they could frustrate young learners.
The activities in Cutting Edge, on the other hand, are much more personalized, engaging and contemporary than those in Reward. Controlled and authentic practice activities alternate throughout the lesson. They aim at communicative competence, unlike Reward where the free practice is a lot more formal (e.g. describing / narrating events). Focus on both accuracy and fluency is equally balanced. In addition, interactive and challenging materials prove motivating for adolescent students.
In terms of language description, the grammar box in Reward first explains the PP semantically and then structurally. Thornbury (1999) suggests that rules of form should come before rules of use, which is the case with Cutting Edge.
The PP in Reward extends through 3 lessons, each giving a main function of the tense: (1) Experiences (Have you ever broken your leg? ). 2) Past actions with present result (She 's just had a baby). 3) Actions from the past continuing to the present (We've had a president since 1888). The advantage of this division is that students are able to concentrate their attention on one aspect at a time. The advantage to my scenario is that the description is easy to absorb, effective and economical in length (Thornbury, 1999).
The grammar focus in Cutting Edge lies on actions still continuing at present. Those are then contrasted with the past simple. The use of time phrases is also elaborated. All this is summarized more deductively in the Language Summary at the end of the coursebook. A setback in the explanation of the function of PP is that it does not appear as clearly defined as in Reward. It reads, for example, 'We use the Present Perfect to talk about the past and the present together' (p. 152), which sounds ambiguous. This is the point that many of my students are unable to link to their L1. For this reason, the language description seems less effective in regards to learnability.
The grammar box in Reward looks somewhat congested. The presentation of the tense is simple, clear and relevant in usage (Harmer, 2001). Contracted forms, negatives and questions are provided. However, the information is cluttered and most learners would not find it inviting to peruse, much like the Language Summary of Cutting Edge. Scrivenner (1994) gives a better solution to such a design which is to present the form in clearly outlined boxes - thus the structure is made accessible, especially to the visual learners. E.g.
A potentially confusing issue of relevance is the lesson on 'PP for experiences' in Reward. It includes an example of a contracted form He 's broken his leg. Semantically, however, this example belongs to the next lesson on 'PP for present results' (e.g. someone 's broken his leg and we see he 's walking with crutches).
The contrast in meaning between PP and past simple has not been sufficiently highlighted in Reward. The grammar box on 'PP for experiences' includes such comparisons but the next two lessons do not illustrate the difference in use. E.g.
We've had a president since 1888 could have been contrasted with.
We first had a president in 1888. On the other hand, Cutting Edge defines a better clarity between both tenses by focusing on time phrases (last year, when she was, in 1990). An adaptation by the teacher is clearly necessary here.
From a teachability point of view, the underpinned difference of the three functions of the PP in Reward is an advantage. A slight disadvantage in Cutting Edge is the length and complexity of the lesson (9 pages). A great benefit, however, is I would not need to adapt the materials in Cutting Edge as much as in Reward.
An advantage to both learnability and teachability in Cutting Edge is that the grammar focus starts with 'minimal sentence pairs' (Thornbury, 1999) where students are given two examples, one with PP and the other with past simple, and are asked to identify differences, which leads to a discovery of the rule - an excellent inductive technique.
Unlike these two coursebooks, the purpose of a grammar book is not to teach but to help students with revision, consolidation, reference. A major difference, therefore, is the absence of authentic, generative situations in the grammar book.
The PP in English Grammar in Use is presented with an example 'nutshell' situation. It includes a sketch of a boy with a lost key, a short context related to the sketch which explains the use of the tense, and a boxed rule of form. This example situation appears simple, clear and effective. The context with the sketch and the rule of form are appropriate to all learners. As the approach is deductive, it is straightforward. The grammar boxes in the coursebooks above lack such clarity of visual description.
Attention is now drawn to the use of the PP. Examples illustrate how 'the action in the past has a result now' or that PP is used to 'give new information'. Those sentences are contextualized, e.g. Is Sally there? - No, she 's gone out; The police have arrested two men in connection with the robbery. The use of the tense is relevant. However, it does not include the concept of experiences, as in Reward, so I have been to many countries may still confuse the learner.
Like Cutting Edge, common combinations of the PP with adverbs are highlighted. All examples simulate natural and spoken instances.
The introductory example situation and the examples of use that follow are all structured in a clear, appealing way, which makes it advantageous from a learnability and a teachability perspective.
English Grammar in Use is aimed at students, which is why each grammar point is described on the left page and is practised with exercises on the right page. The exercises provide a controlled practice, directly related to the rules of use on the left page, e.g. gap-filling with adverbs. They are rather beneficial to students, due to the continuous presence of context, and can be used as a supplement in class.
Use of generative situations where meaning comes before form has proved very productive in my grammar teaching, particularly with adolescents who like the element of surprise. The discovery method suggests a cognitive depth of learning; it is conducive to learner autonomy as it actively involves learners (Thornbury, 1999).
Therefore, a general lesson in my teaching context would follow Scrivenner 's ACRA model - beginning and ending with authentic use (1994) - which is reflected in the approach of both coursebooks.
On using the right coursebook, Halliwell comments 'choosing a book for the whole class is always something like a leap in the dark' (1992). It calls for the teacher 's constant awareness and flexibility to ensure students benefit from activities. Learners will rarely be satisfied simultaneously, so adapting and alternating various elements will ensure that all needs are addressed. In evaluating the three books above, I have considered some of Halliwell 's criteria (1992):
In many respects Cutting Edge resembles a jungle path. As each lesson extends through 9 pages, it offers a useful source of authentic controlled and free practice activities, an attractive, communicative context, a discovery-based approach - all of which would be relevant and teachable in my environment of adolescent students. The rationale behind using Reward is its clear, concise presentation, as well as its effective outline of the PP through 3 consecutive stages. The more deductive approach here is particularly advantageous to the analytical students, to giving a quick revision, and especially to making use of short-spaced lessons. English Grammar in Use is an excellent source of a short, precise and clear description of the PP. The contextualized exercises can be a great asset to the restricted practice in my classroom.
Clearly, an eclectic mix of components from the three books will respond to my students' needs, depending on each individual class, age and background. However, one missing element in those books and one that has proved of high demand for my classroom is games. Games are the best beloved companion to adolescent students. Finding game activities on the PP is my next challenge in preparing a rewarding lesson.
This essay underlines the merit of grammatical accuracy in effective communication. I have reflected on the needs and the L1 transfer characteristics of my teenage students in learning the PP tense. I have viewed the advantages and disadvantages in three books in regards to their interactive value, communicative approach, contextualized presentation, balance of accuracy and fluency-aimed exercises, clarity, simplicity and effectiveness of grammar outline, and have identified their teachability for my classes. I have defined the value of all books and have concluded a varied adaptation of PP activities from all three of them will respond to the needs of learners.
