This study sought to evaluate the freshness of two samples of fish using sensory and chemical assessment methods. In the sensory evaluation one fish sample was found to be fresh and fit for consumption, while a week-old fish sample was reported to be too old for consumption.
The chemical assessment proved to be problematical, and it was concluded that a re-evaluation would be beneficial.
The oldest and still the most commonly used and trusted means of evaluating fish quality are the senses; smell, sight, touch and taste. The positive aspects of the sensory evaluation are that these tests can be carried out anywhere the fish happens to be, and without any laboratory equipment. The evaluation is quick, and many samples can be evaluated in a short time span.
However, the sensory evaluation is a subjective procedure, and cannot be replicated precisely. The sensory evaluation is based on an interaction of psychological, physiological, environmental and economic factors, such as health state, personal prejudices, preferences, sensory acuity, and motives of profit or loss (Farber, 1965). Using this method, assessing the borderline between freshness and spoilage can be challenging.
The criteria associated with freshness; the conditions of the eyes, texture of the flesh, odour, and the appearance of the abdominal walls, were identified by Anderson in 1908 (Farber, 1965). These sensory assessment criteria are still the most trusted sensory evaluation methods today, and the Tory Research Station in Aberdeen, Scotland, have included these criteria in the Torry Score; a graded quality assessment table for evaluation of the quality of fresh fish (Sutherland et al. , 1986). This system, with grades of E, A, B and a "not graded" alternative, might aid in minimizing the personal uncertainties of sensory assessment.
Fish naturally contains trimethylamine oxide (TMAO) which, aided by enzymes and bacteria, breaks down to produce trimethylamine (TMA) as the fresh fish devolves. This causes an unpleasant smell, as well as volatile bases such as ammonia. Thus the TMA or total volatile nitrogen (TVN) of a fish sample can determine the freshness of the fish. Freshness assessment of meat and fish using volatile basic nitrogen compounds was first suggested by Eber (1891) who found that the fuming of a diluted HCI solution in ether-alcohol could be used to determine the freshness of meat. In 1926 Poller and Linneweh found that TMAO was reduced to TMA during spoilage, and this brought Boury (1932) to suggest that this might be used to determine the freshness of fish. The final method, however, as it is used commonly as well as in the present study, was rendered by Beatty and Gibbons in 1937 (Farber, 1965). This method of evaluation has since been further developed and used to assess the quality of a variety of fish. However, inconsistent results have been reported by various authors, and the quality of the method remains disputed.
The study used raw, whole specimens of trout, which is a white freshwater fish. Two fish were sampled, one fresh and one kept for one week in a refrigerator. The procedures used to assess the quality of the fish were sensory evaluation using the Torry Scale. And for the chemical analysis the Kjeldahl procedure was used to measure nitrogen content.
For the chemical analysis of fresh fish the first titration (V1) was found to be 7.4 cm 3, V2 was 7.9 cm 3, and the moisture content was 77.33%.
For the week-old fish sample the values were found to be 22 cm 3 for V1, 1.1 cm 3 for V2, and the moisture content was 75.29%.
For a detailed description of the materials and methods used, please see the U16503 Food Science module handbook pp. 18-19.
Torry scores for the sensory evaluation of the fish samples are displayed in table 1. This shows the fresh sample to be within the quality for consumption, while the week-old sample is not fit for consumption. The fish samples were not gutted.
The chemical evaluation scores are shown in table 2. According to these values, the fish samples are both old and not fit for consumption, except in one expression: the week-old fish sample has a reported TMA of 11.56 mg/100g.
The Torry scores obtained in the sensory evaluation clearly show the fresh fish to be of better freshness quality than the week-old sample. The fresh fish is reported to have a bright, shiny skin without bleaching; transparent outer slime; convex eyes with black pupils and translucent cornea; and a subtle, fresh odour. However, the gills have dulled slightly, indicating the beginning of decay. The week-old sample has been graded with B scores on all aspects, conveying a dull skin, yellowish outer slime, concave pupils, gritty gills, and a foul musty odour (see the Torry Score table in the U16503 Food Science module handbook pp. 19). By the sensory evaluation alone, the fresh fish is considered to be of fresh quality and fit for consumption. The week-old sample, however, should not be sold or consumed.
Kimura and Kimurakura (1934, cited in Farber, 1965) suggested TVN levels of 10 mg/100g for fresh, 20-30mg/100g for beginning of spoilage, and over 30mg/100g for spoiled salmon (of which aquatic family the trout is a member) not fit for consumption. This has since been adjusted, and the cut-off point for fresh fish is now 40mg/100g are considered unfit for consumption. The values found in the present study were considerably higher than 40mg/100g, bar the TMA value of 11.56mg/100g for the week-old sample. The results found in this study are inconsistent to such a degree that one would suspect a mistake might have been made in the chemical procedures or in the calculation. As the calculation has been attempted several times, it is thought that the values obtained in the titration process might be imprecise. It might be advantageous to carry out the experiment once more to see if this would yield more convincing results.
The TVN and TMA methods were created for the evaluation of sea-water fish, and is still intended for this purpose. As the trout is a freshwater fish this might explain part of the reason for the conflicting values in this study. However, the values within the same fish sample as well as between samples were hugely discrepant, and in no way systematic, implying the results are not reliable.
Previous studies and literature on fish quality assessment have reported varying values by this chemical assessment method, as well as discording cut-off points for freshness. This inconsistency is reflected in the previous study, though, as previously mentioned, it is suspected that the values obtained in this study are unreliable in any event.
The sensory evaluation seems to have yielded the most credible results in this study. It is a simpler method than the chemical evaluation, and it would seem that this is in fact the better method, as well as being the most commonly employed method of evaluation.
It has also been proved that practice as well as precision is critical in laboratory assessments.
