This essay describes and discusses the third stage of labour and the types of management available. It gives some background and history of third stage management and the use of oxytocics. It examines the research evidence comparing the two approaches, active and physiological, to determine which method is the safest. This essay also raises some questions regarding the third stage that are not satisfactorily studied and require further research.
The third stage of labour is the period following the birth of the baby until the complete delivery of the placenta and membranes. It usually lasts between 5 and 15 minutes but can take up to an hour (Stables 1999). The third stage involves the separation, decent and expulsion of the placenta and membranes and the control of bleeding from the placental site (Johnson & Taylor 2000). After the birth of the baby the uterine muscle continues to contract and the placental site is reduced, oblique muscle fibres in the myometrium retract and constrict blood supply to the placenta (Stables 1999). A small amount of blood forms between the spongy layer of the decidua and the placental surface stripping it of its attachment (McDonald 1999). Once separated, the placenta and membranes are forced into the lower segment of the uterus and then the vagina by a strong uterine contraction (McDonald 1999).
The third stage has the potential to be the most dangerous stage of labour for the mother (McDonald 1999) primarily because of the risk of postpartum haemorrhage (PPH). Good midwifery care during the third stage of labour can reduce the risk of haemorrhage (McDonald 1999). There are two separate forms of management of the third stage of labour: physiological management, where the third stage progresses naturally following the physiological processes already at work; and active management, where the third stage is managed by a series of interventions, including the administration of an oxytocic drug.
Primary postpartum haemorrhage is defined as excessive blood loss occurring during the third stage of labour or in the first 24 hours following delivery of 500 ml or more, or any amount that compromises the woman 's health (McDonald 1999, Stables 1999). Primary PPH occurs in 6% of labours (Stables 1999). Excessive bleeding occurring after 24 hours post birth and up to six weeks later is termed secondary postpartum haemorrhage (Stables 1999). The commonest cause of primary PPH is an atonic uterus (lack of muscle tone). This is the failure of the living ligature action of the myometrial fibres to contract and retract to compress torn blood vessels at the placental site (McDonald 1999). Causes of atonic uterine action include:
Historically postpartum haemorrhage has been a significant cause of maternal mortality in the UK. In 1932, 450 mothers died from PPH (Inch 1989), in the early 1950 's there were 40 maternal deaths a year due to PPH (Department of Health 2004). The most recent Report on Confidential Enquiries into Maternal Deaths (2000-2002) reported ten maternal deaths due to PPH in the triennium covered (Department of Health 2004). However, this is a striking increase from the previous three years when only one woman died from PPH (Department of Health 2004).
The use of oxytocic drugs and the active management of the third stage of labour was the response of obstetricians to the problems of postpartum haemorrhage (Inch 1989). The effect of ergot, a fungal infection of rye, on the uterus has been known about for hundreds of years, and was used by midwives in the 17th and 18 th centuries (Inch 1989). Ergometrine was isolated from ergot in 1932 (Stables 1999) and a pure form of synthetic oxytocin was synthesized and marketed in the 1950 's (Inch 1989), namely Syntocinon. Initially ergometrine was used therapeutically to treat PPH, and later it was used as a preventative measure after the third stage (Harris 2001). The first routine use of ergometrine in the third stage of labour in 1951 reduced blood loss and the length of the third stage (Stables 1999). Syntometrine (5 units Syntocinon and 0.5 mg ergometrine) was developed and introduced in the early 1960 's (Inch 1989). PPH rates fell with the introduction of oxytocics and many lives were saved by their use (Inch 1989). "However the use of these drugs rapidly became routine 'prophylaxis' for all women, irrespective of the degree of risk..." (Inch 1989 p150).
In the 1980 's women were at lower risk of PPH than previous generations. They were better nourished, younger, of lower parity and less anaemic (Stables 1999). Women were also better informed and were questioning the medicalization of childbirth. Many women requested that prophylactic oxytocics be omitted from their third stage care (Stables 1999). This led to a series of trials examining the safety of this natural third stage method, termed physiological management.
Active management of the third stage is standard practice in the UK (Anderson 2003). This approach "...consists of three interdependent interventions" (Anderson 2003 p102) which are:
The intention of active management is to reduce blood loss and shorten the length of the third stage of labour (Stables 1999). An active third stage usually lasts between 5 and15 minutes (McDonald 1999).
Oxytocic drugs used in the third stage stimulate the uterus to contract (Johnson & Taylor 2000). They are administered either prophylactically during active management or therapeutically during the emergency management of PPH. Syntocinon is given by intramuscular (IM) or intravenous (IV) injection and takes effect in 2-3 minutes (IM) or 40 seconds (IV). Ergometrine, administered by IM or IV injection takes effect in 5-7 minutes (IM) or 40 seconds (IV), and has a much longer lasting effect, however it should not be routinely administered to hypertensive women as it can increase blood pressure (Johnson & Taylor 2000). The drug most commonly used during active management of the third stage is intramuscular Syntometrine 1ml, containing Syntocinon 5 units and ergometrine 0.5 mg. This drug has the combined benefits of each drug, but also the combined side effects (Johnson & Taylor 2000). The use of prophylactic prostaglandins is also being explored (McDonald 1999).
The physiological management of the third stage does not involve any interventions or drugs. Placental separation and expulsion occurs spontaneously and naturally. In a physiological third stage:
Prophylactic oxytocics are not used. However the baby suckling at the breast will cause the reflex release of natural oxytocin from the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland in the mother (McDonald 1999).
The placenta is delivered by maternal effort following signs of separation and decent (McDonald 1999).
The umbilical cord is left intact (not clamped or cut) until the delivery of the placenta (Long 2003). OR the umbilical cord is left intact until it has stopped pulsating (McDonald 1999).
There are differing opinions regarding which components of care constitute a physiological third stage. Long (2003) comments that there is no overall agreement. A physiological third stage can take from 20 minutes to an hour to complete (McDonald 1999).
The Concise Oxford Dictionary definition of safe includes: "Free of danger or injury, affording security or not involving danger or risk. Reliable, certain; that can be reckoned on." (Allen 1990 p1061). Interventions could be considered dangerous or threatening to a childbearing woman, however they could also provide security and reduce risk. The issues that relate to safety in the third stage are:
Women may define safety differently to health professionals or researchers and each woman will have a slightly different personal definition of safety. Therefore "...the advantages and disadvantages of both managements will not be uniformly interpreted by clinicians or childbearing women." (Rogers et al 1998). For many women, safety in the third stage will mean having the lowest possible blood loss and the least risk of PPH. Others however, may rate a low personal risk of PPH of small importance compared with experiencing a natural and intervention free third stage (Rogers et al 1998) that may enable them to feel more secure.
Meticulously designed and executed randomised controlled trials (RCTs) have been named the 'gold standard' of quantitative research (Cluett 2000a). "It could be argued that RCTs are the only effective way to ensure that current obstetric and midwifery practice is evidence-based." (Cluett 2000a p41) However some would argue that an RCT gives an untrue image of objectivity and fails to appreciate the uniqueness of individual human nature by applying a controlling and reductionist approach (Cluett 2000a). A systematic review gathers and evaluates all available evidence on a subject to provide the best possible guide for practice (Cluett 2000b). Meta-analysis involves the use of statistical methods to combine the results from the studies in a systematic review and is generally more powerful and informative than looking at individual studies (Page 2000).
This essay presents and appraises quantitative research data from randomised controlled trials and meta-analysis of research as well as  'softer data' and theories (in the absence of clinical research evidence) developed by authors with many years of clinical experience and observation. The databases accessed during the search for research evidence for this essay were The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews and The Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (both Cochrane Collaboration 2005). The search terms used were: "third stage of labour" AND active AND expectant OR passive OR physiological AND management in All Fields. The Internet, midwifery and medical journals, books and local guidelines were also used as resources.
In the last 20 years five randomised controlled trials (RCT 's) have compared the outcomes of active versus physiological management of the third stage of labour. They are: Bristol 1988, Dublin 1990, Brighton 1993, Abu Dhabi 1997 and Hinchingbrooke 1998. All these studies were undertaken in a hospital setting. Four of these trials were of good methodological quality (Prendiville et al 2000), the Brighton trial had a relatively small number of participants. These studies have been compiled in the Cochrane Collaboration systematic review of 'active versus expectant management in the third stage of labour' (Prendiville et al 2000). This meta-analysis concludes that active management of labour results in statistically significant reductions in the incidence of:
However active management also resulted in an increase in the incidence of:
The authors of the review conclude that routine active management is superior to physiological management in terms of blood loss, PPH (both  500ml and  1000ml) and "...other serious complications of the third stage of labour." (Prendiville et al 2000 p4). When ergometrine is a component of the oxytocic there is an increased risk of unpleasant side effects and hypertension. Recommendations for practice are that active management should be routine for women expecting a vaginal birth in hospital.
There is general agreement that postnatal blood loss exceeding 500 ml constitutes a postpartum haemorrhage. But, how significant is a blood loss of 500 ml in woman who is well nourished, healthy and does n't have anaemia? Postpartum haemorrhage is a significant cause of maternal death in the world, accounting for approximately 250,000 deaths a year (Anderson 2003). The vast majority of these deaths occur in the developing world (Walker & Thompson 1996, Elbourne et al 2001). The World Health Organization (1996) states that in a healthy population PPH blood loss up to 1000ml may be considered physiological and does not necessitate treatment apart from oxytocics. Elbourne (1996) reviewed research on the third stage of labour; one of her conclusions was that the huge majority of women in the UK are at low risk of complications in the third stage of labour and at very low risk of death (cited in Stables 1999 p490). It is accepted that active management is appropriate and necessary for women at high risk of PPH and that physiological management is not appropriate in many cases (for example for a women whose labour has been induced or augmented).
Neonatal outcomes were measured in the Bristol (Prendiville et al 1988) and Hinchingbrooke (Rogers et al 1998) trials. The only differential effect due to the two policies was a higher mean birth weight in babies in the physiological groups of 85g and 67g respectively. This is probably due to extra blood received through delayed cord clamping (Rogers and Wood 2003). The Cochrane review states that this is not a clinically important difference (Prendiville et al 2000). However Piscane (1996) states that a moderate transfusion of about 20-30 ml/kg (of birth weight) endows roughly 30-50 mg more iron, which can help prevent depletion of iron stores in later infancy. This information may be especially significant for children in developing countries where iron deficiency anaemia is common (Piscane 1996).
Nelle et al (1995) studied the effects of 'Leboyer' delivery on neonatal cardiac output and cerebral and gastrointestinal blood flow velocities (cited in Piscane 1996). Their results showed 32% higher blood volumes in babies with delayed cord clamping and a statistically significant increase in packed cell volume at 2-4 hours after birth. Some authors argue that an increased neonatal packed cell volume has negative implications such as increased neonatal jaundice. However Piscane (1996) argues that a moderate placental transfusion does not significantly increase neonatal jaundice. In the Hinchingbrooke trial there was no increased need for phototherapy for jaundice in the physiological group (3.4%), in fact more babies in the active group required phototherapy (4.5%) (Rogers et al 1998).
Mercer (2001) reviewed research on umbilical cord clamping studies from 1980-2001. In seven randomised trials on preterm babies, benefits associated with delayed clamping included higher haematocrit and haemoglobin levels, blood volume and blood pressure, better cardiopulmonary adaptation and fewer transfusions and days of oxygen or ventilation needed. Few if any risks were associated with delayed cord clamping in both term and preterm infants (Mercer 2001).
Clinical trials comparing the short and long term neonatal effects of placental transfusion are needed (Piscane 1996). Rogers et al (1998) state that they plan to follow up babies born in the Hinchingbrooke trial in a future study.
One criticism of the studies comparing active and physiological management is the lack of experience of the midwives in physiological management (Harris 2001). Of the five RCTs only the Hinchingbrooke trial (Rogers et al 1998) was carried out in a unit where midwives were experienced in physiological third stage management. However statistics are not available for rates of physiological management before the trial began (Harris 2001).
The confidence of midwives surveyed at the start of the Hinchingbrooke trial was quite different for the two types of management, 84% felt very confident about active management compared with 42% feeling very confident about physiological management (Rogers et al 1998). A more confident colleague accompanied the midwives who felt less confident. Outcomes for women with a midwife who was initially confident in physiological management were slightly better. However the authors' state that it is difficult to assess the part played in the trial by the midwives confidence (Rogers et al 1998). The results of the Bristol and Dublin trials also suggest that increased midwife experience with physiological third stage management contributes to a reduced risk of PPH (Featherstone 1999).
Buckley (2001) and Odent (1998) argue that if a mother is worried or distracted during the third stage high adrenaline levels will counteract the benefits of natural oxytocin on the uterus. It could be argued that a woman cared for by a midwife who is very confident in physiological third stage care and in the woman 's natural ability may have more efficient natural oxytocic action and therefore be at lower risk of PPH.
Odent (1998) argues that in all of the RCTs undertaken so far none attempt to provide a birth environment that will positively facilitate the natural physiological processes of the third stage. He says, "...there is an obvious incompatibility between the words 'physiological' and 'management' " (Odent 1998 p31) and ads that the physiological processes are highly disturbed. He stresses the importance of a perfectly adjusted thermo-environment because cold will increase the concentrations of catecholamines (adrenaline and noradrenaline) in the woman. Studies from Japan show associations between PPH and high levels of catecholamines (Odent 1998). Odent and Buckley (2000) advocate privacy and unhurried, uninterrupted contact between mother and baby as well as skin-to-skin and eye-to-eye contact and breastfeeding, which influence the release of maternal oxytocin. Buckley states, "...these are practices that are sensible, intuitive and safe..." (Buckley 2001 p33).
An integral part of the report Changing Childbirth is the provision of choice (Featherstone 2001). In the Hinchingbrooke trial 52% of the women who were eligible to take part declined because they specifically requested physiological third stage management. Therefore it is clear that if women are offered physiological management as a reasonable option, many will choose it (Rogers and Wood 2003). The authors of the Hinchingbrooke trial recommend that student midwives be taught the principles of physiological management with an emphasis on recognising deviations from the norm and that midwives who are confident and competent with this method should be valued (Rogers and Wood 2003).
This essay concludes that the active management of the third stage of labour is safer in terms of amount of blood loss and instance of PPH. More evidence is needed on the neonatal effects of immediate versus delayed cord clamping and third stage management in non-hospital settings and the developing world. It is crucial that women are given informed choice regarding their third stage care, ideally early in the antenatal period. Decisions on individual care should include the weight that women and caregivers place on the risk of PPH and transfusion versus the perceived advantages of non-intervention. Midwives should be trained and remain skilled in physiological third stage management in order to provide choice for women. One survey of midwives' physiological third stage practice showed 57 variations in method, with only 33% of midwives describing safe physiological third stage management (Featherstone 2001). It would be unfortunate for the midwifery skills required to facilitate a natural and physiological third stage to be lost, and women 's' choice limited in the process.
