The Gothic was a major product of Romanticism. Writers such as Horace Walpole, Ann Radcliffe and William Lewis are sometimes described as the "early masters and mistresses of the genre." In the eighteenth century, the term "Gothic" carried powerful and negative connotations. It signified "a 'barbarous', and 'medieval' past . . .used derogatively about art, architecture and writing that failed to conform to the standards of neoclassical taste. . .and signified the lack of morality and reason.".
Punter, David ed, A Companion to the Gothic, (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 2000) p.1.
Botting, Fred, 'In Gothic Darkly: Heterotopia, History, Culture,' in A Companion to the Gothic, edited by David Punter (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 2001) p.3.
Ann Radcliffe, one of the first Gothicists differentiated between the different types of Gothic. Not only is there terror and horror Gothic, but rationalized and unrationalized Gothic. Terror Gothic attempts to elicit psychological fear. Radcliffe 's The Mysteries of Udolpho is just one example. Horror Gothic focuses on bodily gore and violence. Radcliffe states that "terror and horror are so far opposite, that the first expands the soul and awakens the faculties to a high degree of life; the other freezes and nearly annihilates them." Rationalized Gothic, such as Austen 's Northanger Abbey attempts to reveal the mystery by explaining the supernatural element. Unrationalized cannot explain the supernatural. For example, in The Monk and The Ancient Mariner, the supernatural cannot be rationalized. " . . .where Radcliffe explained the supernatural as the product of natural causes, Lewis left it as a problem.".
Ann Radcliffe, 'On the Supernatural in Poetry,' The New Monthly Magazine (1826): pp.145-52.
Robert Miles, 'Ann Radcliffe and Matthew Lewis,' in A Companion to the Gothic, edited by David Punter (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 2001) p.41.
The term  'subversive' generally means to tackle conventions or to be revolutionary. Can this be applied to the Gothic? Many argue that the Gothic in the eighteenth century was subversive as it certainly provoked many negative responses. When William Lewis first published The Monk, in 1796, it was received with outrage and disgust because of its sexual violence and explicit descriptions. People were outraged that this book was written by a Member of Parliament. Upon publication, Lewis "foolishly bragged on the title page that he had just been elected a Member of Parliament, which made the novel 's immorality even more threatening." Coleridge 's review of The Monk appeared in the Critical Review, where he blasted the novel as "blasphemous." Lewis was forced to produce a censored version, after a law suit, deeming the work as obscene and blasphemous. Coleridge was outraged that Lewis was a man of rank and fortune. "Yes! The author . . .signs himself a LEGISLATOR!- We stare and tremble." Thomas Mathias in The Pursuits of Literature shared Coleridge 's views and was repulsed by The Monk and the fact that Lewis was very young when he wrote the novel. Horace Walpole, the author of The Castle of Otranto was also a man of privileged background, being the son of Britain 's first Prime Minister. The fact that these men had a say in the running and decision-making of the country was subversive in itself when coupled with the themes and ideology in the Gothic novel. "A legislator in our own parliament, a member of the House of Commons . . .an elected guardian and defender of the laws . . .has neither scrupled nor blushed to depict and to publish . . .the arts of lewd . . .seduction, and to thrust upon the nation the most open and unqualified blasphemy . . .".
Norton, Rictor ed, Gothic Readings: The First Wave, 1764-1840, (New York: Leicester University Press, 2000) p.117.
Ibid., p.117.
Ibid., p. 299.
Thomas Mathias, 'The Pursuits of Literature, or What you Will,' in Gothic Readings: The First Wave, 1764-1840, edited by Rictor Norton (New York: Leicester University Press, 2000) p.292.
Ibid., p.292.
Religion, sex, incest, matricide, Satan worship and the supernatural are just some of the common themes in Gothic works. The theme of concealment and revelation is also present in the Gothic. Wordsworth and Coleridge 's Lyrical Ballads also include many Gothic themes. For example, The Ancient Mariner focuses on the element of the supernatural and the sublime and The Dungeon emphasises on the theme of enclosure and concealment. The Romantics focused on primitivism, the importance of passion and emotion. Lyrical Ballads endorse all of these things. However, they were not always met with approval. Sir Walter Scott claims that Wordsworth "stoops to vulgar language." One article in the Edinburgh Review claimed that ". . .(Wordsworth) connects lofty conceptions with objects his readers will think of as low, silly and uninteresting.".
Sir Walter Scott, 'Of the Living Poets of Great Britain,' (1808) in Edinburgh Annual Register in William Wordsworth: A Reference Guide to British Criticism, 1793-1899 , N.S.Bauer (Boston: G.K.Hall & Co, 1978) p.12.
Jeffrey Francis, 'Edinburgh Review,' (1807) in William Wordsworth: A Reference Guide to British Criticism, 1793-1899 , N.S.Bauer (Boston: G.K.Hall & Co, 1978) p. 7.
Religion is a very prominent theme in Gothic works, particularly in The Monk. Catholicism is criticized and displayed as a superstitious denomination filled with lustful monks bent on sexual perversion and obsession. Lewis 's fusion of sex and religion was not very popular. Having a man of the clergy commit rape and murder would be considered extremely shocking to some members of the public. In his article Europhobia, Robert Miles focuses on the opening chapter in The Monk.
Lewis, Matthew, The Monk, (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998) p.1.
Miles looks at how Lewis has created an image of the Catholic church as being a sexual meeting place rather than one of worship. "In short, it is a society that is worldly when it ought to be religious and religious when it ought to be worldly." Lewis 's critique of religion overlaps with the shared interest of Wordsworth and Coleridge to explore and discover. This opinion of Catholicism is extremely prejudice and subversive in itself, which is why many branded the novel as blasphemous. Religion is present in The Ancient Mariner and a shared theme of the wandering Jew occurs in both works. This portrays the anti-religious views of the authors.
Robert Miles, 'Europhobia: The Catholic Other in Horace Walpole and Charles Maturin,' in European Gothic: A Spirited Exchange 1760-1960, edited by Avril Horner (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2002) p.84.
The Mad Mother in Lyrical Ballads mirrors the theme of the dead baby in The Monk. It is a very dark poem, describing the mother clutching the dead baby to her in a similar way to Agnes in The Monk.
Lewis, Matthew, The Monk, (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998) p.415.
The lurid descriptions in the novel were not well received. The language was attacked for being too explicit. The description of the putrefying baby challenged sensibility and taste and would have been considered as unfit reading material, especially for women. The rape scene in The Monk is a classic example as it is filled with emotive language and imagery.
Ibid., p.383.
Byron, whose works tackled conventions themselves, noted that "these descriptions ought to have been written by Tiberius at Caprea - they are forced - the philtered ideas of a jaded voluptuary." The violent and rich language was definitely considered subversive at the time of publication and was also deemed unnatural, by no other than Wordsworth. He described the gothic as "contemptuous" and stated his "desire for plain language." Interestingly, however, Wordsworth 's Goody Blake and Harry Gill, also carries the theme of brutalising a woman and cursing to God, which mirrors the way the monk curses Agnes.
Norton, Rictor, ed, Gothic Readings: The First Wave, 1764-1840 (New York: Leicester University Press, 2000) p.17.
Ibid., p.224.
William Wordsworh, 'Lyrical Ballads,' in Romanticism: An Anthology, edited by Duncan Wu, second edition (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 2001) p.224.
Homosexuality is often linked to the gothic novel. Many thinkers conclude that the Gothic novel is a reflection on the author. It is interesting that most Gothic writers were men of privilege, such as Walpole, Beckford and Byron. Beckford, in fact had to abandon his parliamentary seat due to a homosexual scandal in 1784. During the eighteenth century, sodomy was a capital offence and after the French Revolution, homosexual persecution intensified due to heightened anxieties. Robert Miles asks, "how then, did Lewis get away with his 'open secret'?" Miles goes on to explain that due to their class and social position, their "secret" remained safe as long as they behaved decorously. " . ..there is a long list of distinguished male Gothic writers who were either overtly or covertly homosexual. . . its main practitioners were upper-class Englishmen whose homosexuality was either an open secret or one much speculated upon.".
Clare Tuite, 'Cloistered Closets: Enlightenment Pornography, The Confessional State, Homosexual Persecution and The Monk,'(1997) in Romanticism on the Net, retrieved on 28th October 2005 from the World Wide Web:
Robert Miles, 'Ann Radcliffe and Matthew Lewis,' in A Companion to the Gothic, edited by David Punter (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 2000) p.45.
Ibid., p.45.
An example of homosexuality in The Monk is the relationship between Ambrosio and Rosario, the novice. Tuite describes this as "the romance plot of monastic male homoeroticism." The relationship mirrors the ancient Greek relationships between young male novices and older men.
Clara Tuite, 'Cloistered Closets: Enlightenment Pornography, The Confessional State, Homosexual Persecution and The Monk,' (1997) in Romanticism on the Net, retrieved on 28th October 2005 from the World Wide Web:
Lewis, Matthew, The Monk, (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998) p.42.
Of course, Rosario is in fact Mathilda. She is disguised as a man and then reveals herself as the devil. Throughout the novel, we are constantly unsure of the true sex of Mathilda. Is she a woman or a man? The theme of concealment and revelation is clearly evident here and this may be conveying the repressed homosexual desire felt by the Abbot, or even by Lewis. Norton believes the novel reflects Lewis 's homosexuality. ". . .(he never married and had long relationships with William Kelly. . .) as well as his subversive desire to shock his morally complacent elders . . .Lewis 's analysis of repressed desire is compelling . . ." As homosexuality was a serious crime during the Romantic period, this would have been considered transgressive and immoral.
Norton, Rictor, ed, Gothic Readings: The First Wave, 1764-1840, (New York: Leicester University Press, 2000) p.117.
There are also views on the gothic being pornographic as the texts often aim at eliciting a physical or physiological response from the reader in the same way that pornography does.
Lewis, Matthew, The Monk, (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998) pp.300-301.
Lewis seeks a response by his use of emotive language, such as "nakedness" and "tear off those garments." He also engages in the senses, making for realistic description.
Ibid., p.300.
The monk also seems to rejoice in the rape of Antonia. He is described as "accomplishing" his crime, almost as if it is a positive, rewarding act. Coleridge attacked the novel 's "libidinous minuteness." A recurring theme in the gothic is voyeurism and the idea of watching people watching, which again symbolises cloistered pleasures. This is often thought of as very erotic. In his critique, Coleridge condemns the sexual content of the book, suggesting it completely subversive. In the Monk, Ambrosio looks on Antonia by use of the mirror. In Lyrical Ballads, we see this theme being used in The Thorn. The poem is about watching a lady watching a grave.
Clara Tuite, 'Cloistered Closets: Enlightenment Pornography, The Confessional State, Homosexual Persecution and The Monk,' (1997) in Romanticism on the Net, retrieved on 28th October 2005 on the World Wide Web:
Norton, Rictor, ed, Gothic Readings: The First Wave, 1764-1840, (New York: Leicester University Press, 2000) p.295.
William Wordsworth, 'Lyrical Ballads,' in Romanticism: An Anthology, edited by Duncan Wu, second edition (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 1994) p.235.
Again, this is used as a tool to seek a physical and also a psychological response. In Lyrical Ballads, Wordsworth and Coleridge wanted to blend together the unknown with the familiar to create uncertainty and anxiety. Coleridge stated that the aim was to "excite a feeling analogous to the supernatural, by awakening the mind 's attention from the lethargy of custom." The theme of the supernatural and the rich language is often considered as sublime, which can be both large and scary but also very pleasurable, which leads us back to the idea of the Gothic being very sexual.
If the Gothic novel is always subversive, why did it prove to be so popular during the Romantic period? As Norton states, "the most popular literature in Britain during the late eighteenth . . .century was not the Romantic poetry, but 'the latest trash of the day': the Gothic novel." This may prove to some extent the theory that the Gothic was not as subversive as expected.
Ibid., p.1.
Although Wordsworth spoke out against the Gothic in his preface to Lyrical Ballads, his works adopt many Gothic conventions and themes. For example, many of the poems' content include barbarity, religion, motherhood, the supernatural, enclosure and exposure. Coleridge was influenced by many Gothic works. In fact, many writers were influenced by the Gothic. Austen felt compelled to write a parody on the Gothic with Northanger Abbey and Lewis was in fact influenced by the works of the Marquis de Sade.
Horner, Avril, ed, European Gothic: A Spirited Exchange 1760-1960 (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2002) p.39.
The Gothic may be seen as being a set of conventions rather than a genre. Shakespeare may be considered as one of the first writers to include Gothic conventions in his works. Macbeth and Hamlet both include the theme of the supernatural and sublime. Folk stories including demons, ghosts and medieval settings were told for years. Graveyard poetry were also very Gothic in content and were widely read before the Romantic period. For example, Robert Blair 's The Grave, published in 1743 is a poem which engages the senses and focuses on the atmosphere of the night.
Robert Blair, 'The Grave,' in Literary Gothic, retrieved on 28th October 2005 on the World Wide Web:
Graveyard poetry is also concerned with exploring mortality and religion. As these poems and stories have been around for years, the Gothic did not develop in the Romantic period and so it was n't as revolutionary or transgressive as it would seem.
There are many writers who perceive the Gothic to be a type of "revolt against rationality, modernity or the Enlightenment." The Gothic is also misconceived as being examples of dream-writing or fantasy-like fiction. Dreams in Gothic writing is very popular. In The Monk, Antonia wakes from a nightmare to find herself in a nightmare. Walpole 's Castle of Otranto is known to have been originated in a dream. Many thinkers reject this anti-realist view and protest that the Gothic novel reflects society. "Gothic functions as the mirror of eighteenth century mores and values: a reconstruction of the past as the inverted, mirror image of the present." The repercussions of the French Revolution led to anxiety in society and xenophobia, which is why many Gothic works are set in European cities and display Catholic characters as superstitious and perverse. The Monk for example, is set in Madrid. Fear and paranoia about wars, bloodbaths and revolutions is reflected in many Gothic works. For example, in The Monk, the church is set on fire and we see plenty of blood in the novel. In Wordsworth 's The Convict, we see this fear relayed in the bloody imagery and alienation from society.
Chris Baldick and Robert Mighall, 'Gothic Criticism,' in A Companion to the Gothic, edited by David Punter (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 2000) pp.209-10.
Fred Botting, 'In Gothic Darkly: Heterotopia, History, Culture,' in A Companion to the Gothic, edited by David Punter (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 2000) p.5.
William Wordsworth, 'Lyrical Ballads,' in Romanticism: An Anthology, edited by Duncan Wu, second edition, (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 1994) p.265.
The Gothic may also be trying to compare Britain to these European cities. " . . . recalls a Gothic heritage to contrast an ordered and civilised England with a monstrously unnatural, irrational and barbaric France." This suggests that the Gothic reflects the xenophobia of society.
Fred Botting, 'In Gothic Darkly: Heterotopia, History, Culture,' in A Companion to the Gothic, edited by David Punter, (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 2000) p.6.
Romantic Britain was largely Protestant and so the attack on Catholicism would not have been completely ill-received. Society was in fact now beginning to be open to new, secular views and ideology. The fact that the Romantic period emphasised the importance of raw emotion, feeling and passion as opposed to reason and rationality (as proposed by the Enlightenment), the content of the Gothic novel would have been expected.
A shared interest in uncertainty of disintegration and alienation in society is evident in The Monk and Lyrical Ballads. Ambrosio becomes an outcast and recieves his punishment. In the poems in Lyrical Ballads we see the importance of affection as the opposite end of alienation. If the Gothic is mirroring the social problems of the day, it would n't necessarily be considered subversive or revolutionary, but rather reactionary. "After all . . .the leading Gothicists were anti-revolutionary; Walpole . . .would have regarded socialism with disgust; Radcliffe was deeply conservative and Lewis was a capitalist slave-owner.".
Chris Baldick and Robert Mighall, 'Gothic Criticism,' in A Companion to the Gothic, edited by David Punter, (Oxford, Blackwell Publishers, 2000) p. 212.
The Monk was not only subjected to unpleasant reviews. In the Vindication of The Monk, the critic realises the books worth. "I hear an immediate outcry raised against me - What! Defend a bad book - a work of licentiousness and blasphemy? . . .I do not pretend to defend a bad book . . . I ask this simple question - is the picture of vice . . .a dangerous sight? . . .is it not attended with good effects, by acting as a beacon to mankind?" This proves that the novel received some good reviews and was therefore not entirely subversive. In their turn, Lyrical Ballads were also well received and appreciated. "In Lyrical Ballads, Wordsworth was a bold and fortunate innovator . . .he has taught us new sympathies.".
Anon, 'Vindication of The Monk,' in Gothic Readings: The First Wave, 1764-1840 edited by Rictor Norton, (New York: Leicester University Press, 2000) p.305.
James Montgomery, 'Eclectic Review,' in William Wordsworth: A Reference Guide to British Criticism, 1793-1899, N.S.Bauer, (Boston: G.K.Hall & Co., 1978) p.9.
How far can we conclude that the Gothic is always subversive? There is evidence to support the fact that the Gothic raised outrage and disgust by many writers and thinkers at the time, due to its lewd descriptions and controversial themes. However, one must take into account the influence the Gothic had on many writers of the period, as previously shown. The Gothic may indeed be described as tackling conventions, but is it subversive in the pejorative sense that it is assumed? The critic, Montague Summers claims that "the  'spirit' of Gothic fiction was the quintessence of Romanticism and that: 'The Romanticist is not a revolutionary; he is rather a reactionary.'".
Chris Baldick and Robert Mighall, 'Gothic Criticism,' in A Companion to the Gothic, edited by David Punter, (Oxford, Blackwell Publishers, 2000) p.212-13.
However, although the Gothic tried to mirror the social upheaval of the day, it cannot be denied that it was received with shock and disgust and was more than once described as "subversive.".
