The central aim of this report is to investigate to what extent students are interested in history. However, the report concentrates not only on one particular branch of history, but its questionnaire covers a wide range of different situations that are connected to history. This includes history both as a subject at school and as one 's own leisure activity.
It cannot be argued that history is quite an important factor in our daily life and it helps the people to understand the present (see Crabtree, 1993). The Second World War, for example, has still a deep impact on certain today 's political and diplomatic decisions. The Commonwealth is mostly associated with the Age of British Empire. Box-office hits like "Troy" or "Gladiator" pick up a motive of the ancient Greek or Roman history and tell a story about passed times. Old cities like Oxford, which have seen many centuries passing by, are full of beautiful architecture and the millions of tourists every year are proof that many people are still interested in history.
The survey for this report may not be necessarily valid for the whole British population, because the sample it is based on is relatively small. Thus, in order to give a more comprehensive view on students' interest in history, the findings of this survey will also be compared to the findings of two other, larger surveys.
The survey for this report was conducted at Oxford Brookes University, Gipsy Lane Campus between the 12 th and 16 th of October 2006. Fourteen students, with equal numbers of males and females, were chosen at random, provided only that they were not students of the history department. They were asked to complete a questionnaire of ten questions. Apart from the first two questions, the purpose of which was to check the gender and age of the student, all others focused on the particular student 's general interest in history (see appendix for a copy of the original questionnaire).
The first two questions asked the students about their gender and age. As mentioned before, the number of male and female was equal and the majority of them (64%) was between 18 and 19 years old. 29% stated that they were between 20 and 21 and 7% were between 23 and 24 years old.
The following questions were related to history as a subject at school. In the first one, the interviewees had to give their opinion about the statement: I enjoyed history at school. A clear majority (79%) answered, that they agreed with it, while 14% disagreed and 7% strongly agreed with it. This result corresponds with the opinion of academics, who think that history as a subject has been remaining popular among students over the past five years (see Halpin, 2003). The statement of the second question was that history is a very important subject at school. Like before, the majority (71%) agreed and 14% even strongly agreed to it. However, 7% each stated that they did not know or disagreed.
The next two questions concerned the different aspects and periods of history. Here, the students could choose more than one answer. Most of them (27%) said they are interested in military aspects, followed by political/diplomatic and science/technology aspects (both 15%) and ethnic aspects (12%). 6% of the interviewees expressed an interest in religion or economy/business. A small minority of 3% each stated either an interest in women 's history or no interest at all. The most popular epoch with 44% was modern history, followed by ancient history (32%). 19% of the students favoured medieval history and 5% showed no particular interest in any period. This result is largely in accordance with the report by Tony Halpin, which stated that too many students opt for the 20 th century and that "the Nazi era had become an obsession" (Halpin 2003).
When subsequently asked how often they go to museums, the majority of 50% answered that they visit a museum once a year, compared with 22% who go every three months. 14% each stated that they go either almost never or every six months. The majority of the interviewees (44%) preferred art museums, followed by natural science (28%), historical (17%) and technical museums (11%).
The last questions wanted to shed light on the student interest in the history of Oxford - the city in which every one of them was studying. A majority of 57% had an interest in the university city, while 28% were not sure and 14% did not care about Oxford as a historical city. However, none of the 57% who have shown an interest in the city and no one of the others knew what "The Oxford Story" was.
The oral interviews suggest that many students are aware of the importance of history at school (85%), even if they did not enjoy their history lessons (14%). In addition, it seems that the interviewees have a wide range of different historical aspects which they are interested in. It was only the military aspect which had a small majority of 27%. Surprisingly, here the students' opinion differs significantly from the survey by Robert Cassanello and Daniel S. Murphree: in their evaluation the three most frequent answers according to the interest were social, ethnic and science/technology aspects. It is also interesting, that in this large survey, the women 's aspect was the fourth strongest result (see Cassanello and Murphree, no date), compared with the second weakest result here (3%).
The fact that 32% expressed an interest in ancient history and 19% in medieval history is also quite interesting: Halpin quotes in his report some academics who claim that students nowadays are only interested in modern history (see Halpin 2003), but this is not the case in this report. In comparison with the 44% who favoured modern history, the combination of ancient and medieval history gains a clear majority (51%).
Crabtree argues that the modern society "has turned its back on the past" not because of a lack of information, but because of indifference (Crabtree 1993). This statement may be right for the 14% of the interviewees who said that they almost never go to museums. However, the clear majority of 85% who goes once a year, every six or every three months implies that many people are still quite interested in history, especially in the history of arts (44%).
Furthermore, there is also a great interest (57%) in the history of Oxford. It is nevertheless astonishing that not one of the students knew what "The Oxford Story" - a popular museum about the history of the University of Oxford - was.
The results of this report show that students are still interested in history and think it is a subject of high importance at school. It may be assumed, according to the high percentage (86%) who have enjoyed history lessons at school, that these students will try to broaden their historical knowledge in their free-time. The great number of the interviewees who go at least once a year to a museum (85%) also imply interest in history during leisure time.
Moreover, the report has proved that the interviewees are not only interested in modern history, but also in ancient and medieval history, however, with a strong accent on the traditional military aspect.
When I read the assignment for the report I was a little bit confused at the beginning, because I've never written a report like this one before. I knew how to compile and evaluate a questionnaire, but I was not sure about how to put the different parts of the report in the correct order. It was also a little difficult for me to stay away from over-colourful expressions and long sentences, because last semester I did an English language course which was specialised on descriptive essays. Consequently, it was quite hard at the beginning to get into the academic, objective language. Another complicated task was to find secondary sources. After an exhausting and exhaustive search in the electronic library and on the internet, I was relieved that I had found at least two articles which were finally related in some ways to my topic.
All in all, I enjoyed it very much to interview other students and got quite excited when I evaluated their answers. I was surprised that almost every interviewee was immediately willing to read and answer my questionnaire. Some of them even wanted to know the results of the evaluation.
