Distribution started to take over at the end of the twentieth century as one of the most critical factors for the competitiveness of tourism organizations and destinations. The development and growth of online travel, related to the expansion of information and communication technologies (ICTs), represents a paradigm shift in the tourism industry (Buhalis, 2003). Nowadays, electronic distribution is one of the most powerful marketing tools of the tourism sector, which is rapidly developing (O'Connor, 1999).
The first part of this assignment discusses theoretical issues related to distribution channels in travel and tourism. Thereafter the paper focuses on explanation of the chosen travel package and consumer profile, as well as evaluation of three different electronic distribution channels from the customer perspective. Finally, in the third part, recommendations to analysed organizations are provided.
Buhalis (2003) defines distribution channel as a set of interdependent organizations engaged in the process of making a product or service available for use or consumption by the consumer. The three main actors in a distribution channel are principals, intermediaries and consumers. Principals can be defined as suppliers of a service in a tourism industry that provide the core product for customers to consume. Intermediaries act as a third party between sellers and buyers that help principals to promote, sell and distribute their products or services to final buyers (Buhalis, 2003). Consumers are the final users of the product or service.
Principals can be distributed through various different channels. In the first channel, direct channel, customers communicate directly with the tourism supplier. This channel can be the most cost-effective form principals' perspective as there are no intermediaries requiring a commission. In the second channel of distribution, the referral network, principals such as branded hotel and restaurant chains, use each individual retail outlet to promote the other properties of the chain (Bowie and Buttle, 2004). On the other hand, principals often choose to use the services of an intermediary, which take different forms. Travel agents can be used as an intermediary; they advise and sell a range of holidays as well as other tourism offerings to potential and existing customers and in return receive a commission from the principal (Lumsdon, 1997). The fourth channel of distribution involves tour operator as an intermediary. Tour operators are wholesalers and act as consolidators. Their most significant contribution in the distribution channel is development of tourism packages, which are then marketed to consumers directly. The fifth distribution channel consists of tour operator and travel agent as intermediaries. Here tour operators use travel agents to promote their all-inclusive tourism packages and pay them a commission for any bookings made (Bowie and Buttle, 2004). O'Connor (1999) suggests another distribution channel in tourism, the one that includes government tourism organizations that also act as intermediaries, distributing information and brochures for tourism suppliers within their region.
Along with the technological revolution several additional players have emerged, such as Computer Reservation Systems (CRSs), Global Distribution Channels (GDSs) and Destination Management Systems (DMSs), facilitating the distribution of tourism products. CRSs originally appeared in the early 1960s as the internal inventory systems developed by airlines. They can be defined as computerized systems that 'assist tourism enterprises with handling their inventories profitably and with facilitating the tourism products distribution' (Buhalis, 2003, p. 93). They have become powerful wealth-creating tools of tourism industry and have become profit centres in their own right (Poon, 1994). Airline computer reservations systems subsequently evolved into global distribution systems (GDSs). These can be described as  'super switches' connecting several CRSs and linking principals to intermediaries anywhere in the world (Inkpen, 1998). Today 's GDS are a convenient electronic tool for all travel information and reservation needs, and have therefore become a necessary channel of distribution for any product sold through travel agencies (O'Connor, 1999). There are currently four major GDS systems: Amadeus, Galileo, Sabre and Worldspan (Cooper et al., 2005). DMSs are another player in a tourism distribution channel and can be described as collections of computerized information accessible about a specific destination, usually managed by destination management organizations (DMOs).
The continuous development of information and communication technologies (ICTs) during the last decade has had major implications for the tourism industry as a whole. ICTs have introduced a variety of opportunities and challenges and have revolutionized tourism distribution channels and relationships between principals, intermediaries and consumers significantly (Buhalis, 2003). As tourism suppliers have a constant need to reduce distribution costs, the opportunity to reach customers in a global market directly has led to a substantial amount of avoiding traditional intermediaries. This phenomenon is called disintermediation and is enabled by ICTs which decrease coordination and communication costs (Werthner and Klein, 1999). Arguments for the disintermediation are that it enables principals to directly communicate with customers as well as reduce their distribution costs and consequently the prices as well. Nevertheless, disintermediation also has its disadvantages, leading to an exploding number of links for principals and customers as well as a poor integration of services from different independent sources (Werthner and Klein, 1999). Reintermediation has occurred as a result, leading to intermediaries adjusting their service offerings to the needs and opportunities of an electronic sales channel while providing added value for their customer at a reasonable price. New companies, called cybermediaries, have emerged, finding innovative ways of adding value on the Web (Werthner and Klein, 1999). Moreover, nowadays complex tourism networks are emerging on the Web with players cooperating and competing at the same time, leading to the phenomenon of coopetition.
Information and communication technologies (ICTs) gradually change the distribution function from information exchange and reservations to a much more sophisticated mechanism of adding value and providing service. With the proliferation of the Internet a whole range of new eTourism intermediaries has emerged. According to travel e-business typology adapted from Tapscott et al. (2000) web intermediaries can be classified into five different categories: aggregators, integrators, infomediaries, alliance and marketplace (auction sites) (Bowie and Paraskevas, 2006). Tapscott et al. (2000) define aggregators as an intermediary between suppliers and consumers, which create travel packages according to market needs and make purchases convenient for customers. Integrators, on the other hand, take into consideration individual 's needs and wants and design and deliver a product according to specific customer needs (Bowie and Paraskevas, 2006). Infomediaries provide customers with the information they need to make appropriate choices, which includes price comparisons as well as quality assessments of the suppliers (Chu et al. , 2005). Tourist boards and price comparison engines are a good example of infomediaries. Internet auction sites such as priceline or ebaytravel are a form of online commerce where buyers and sellers come together in a central worldwide marketplace. Alliances are cooperative relationships between different suppliers, established to accelerate the competence building process and to expand the reach and visibility of their activities (Werthner and Klein, 1999).
From a principal 's perspective direct channel is the most cost-effective one as it enables principal to completely control price and manage the inventory. Moreover, it allows maximisation of brand value with no dilution. On the other hand, with the use of intermediaries, principal looses the control of price and its brand becomes diluted. When using aggregators as an intermediary principal 's control of price is the lowest and its brand becomes highly diluted, resulting in a loss of ownership of customer (Bowie and Paraskevas, 2006).
From the customer perspective electronic distribution channels allow enormous amount of information easily available and accessible at anytime from any place as well as enable customers to make reservations quickly, conveniently and possibly at a lower price comparing to conventional methods of distribution. Customers can take unlimited time for planning, virtually explore various destinations as well as evaluate what meets their travel requirements and available budget (Bowie and Paraskevas, 2006).
A general trend for horizontal and/or vertical integration can be noticed in the tourism industry. Integration, either vertical or horizontal, effectively restructures the distribution of power and adds to conflict opportunities within the tourism distribution channel (Buhalis and Laws, 2001). Horizontal integration occurs at the same level of any tourism distribution channel through merges or takeovers, enabling homogeneous companies to distribute their products and services more effectively and efficiently (Buhalis, 2003). Vertical integration, on the other hand, is a result of merging organizations at one level in the tourism distribution channel with members from other levels to achieve economies of scale, better cost and channel control, coordinated brand management and more bargaining power.
As Buhalis and Laws (2001) suggest, the concepts of dependence, cooperation, power and conflict are highly relevant in tourism industry. Understandably, each member of tourism distribution channel has its own needs and wants, which are different from other members of the channel. As some of these needs are conflicting and antagonistic a certain degree of channel conflict is unavoidable. Conflict arises generally due to the natural tendency of each member to maximize their profit margin at the cost of other members in the channel, as customers are willing to pay a fairly fixed amount for their products and services (Buhalis, 2003). Relationship between principals and intermediaries can be thought of a as channel conflict between competing brands as both of the actors want to "own" the customer and turn him into a loyal consumer (Bowie and Paraskevas, 2006).
Nowadays consumers can easily compare different products as well as the published prices, when searching tourism Internet sites, making Internet prices transparent (Bowie and Buttle, 2004). Price wars and different pricing strategies emerge as a result, such as for example "Guaranteed Best Rate" strategy where principals ensure customers they will not find their brand priced lower on an intermediaries' web site.
Turban and King (2003) define customer relationship marketing/management (CRM) as a customer service approach that recognizes customers as a core of a business and focuses on building long-term relationships with them and thus adding value for both the customer and the company. In a today 's highly competitive world internet can be seen as a means of providing opportunities for companies to customize their offers focusing on Web based relationship marketing. Customer trust, commitment and loyalty are core concepts in relationship marketing. According to McCole (2002) trust is a vital phenomenon in a consumer 's mindset with regards to buying services online. Indeed, Reichheld and Schefter (2000) believe that in e-commerce environment customers acknowledge trust to be more important than price. Furthermore, nowadays the powerful features of new technologies, such as virtual reality or intelligent agents, can be effectively applied to provide an e-business environment enabling the formation of trust (Papadopoulou et al., 2001).
Development of a strong brand is of a great importance in a today 's highly competitive e-business environment. Tapscott et al. (2000) argue that the brand is no longer an image created through one-to-many communications. Marketers should start to think of communications as a two-way process and of the brand as a measure of relationship capital. Brands differentiate companies from their competitors and can increase trust between the company and the customer (Chu et al. , 2005). Customer retention, based on trust, can be turned into loyalty. According to Reichheld and Schefter (2000) the unique economics of e-commerce make customer loyalty more significant than ever. Customer loyalty is no longer just one of the many ways to increase profits but is essential for company 's survival.
The general considerations and concerns about payment, security and privacy have been brought to the forefront with trading on the Internet. In order to make the Internet a safe place for customers where they can exchange accurate information and conduct transactions, self-regulated compliance programmes that award seals to privacy-friendly web sites, such as TRUSTe and BBB Online, have been established. Nakra (2001) believes that privacy policies are a necessity in an e-commerce environment and should offer a clear explanation to the customer about what information is collected, for what purpose it is used, and with whom it is shared. An "opt out" option should also be available to allow visitors to forbid usage of their personal data for marketing purposes. Furthermore, customer should have an option to choose whether or not to receive cookies (Nakra, 2001).
Security of transactions is critical for consumer satisfaction. According to Marcussen (1999) actual and potential Internet buyers are very concerned about the potential misuse of their credit card details. However, technology solutions, such as advanced encryption techniques and digital certificates, are gradually making the Internet safer and increasing customer confidence. Turban and King (2003) point out that special protocols, such as Secure Socket Layers (SSLs), are a necessity for companies, operating in an e-commerce environment, to secure customers' e-payments and thus enhance their satisfaction.
The selected customers for the purpose of this assignment are going on a leisure trip to Iceland where they are going to spend five days, departing on 14th May 2007. They will fly from Manchester (UK) to Reykjavik with Icelandair and will be accommodated in a three-star hotel, Fosshotel Lind, with breakfast provided. The main purpose of their travel is special occasion, the 60 th birthday. Furthermore, they are interested in health travelling, which encompasses gentle walking trails and spas in Iceland. In addition, they are very keen on the country 's natural environment and are therefore going to choose their activities accordingly. They intend to visit some of the Iceland 's most impressive sights, such as Gulfoss, Geysir and The Blue Lagoon. For more detail on the travel package please refer to Appendix 1.
Customer profile in this coursework will be analyzed according to Kotler 's et al. (1996) major segmentation variables. The profile of the customers refers to a married couple, Mary and Eric. Considering geographic segmentation variables their country of origin is United Kingdom, region Northern England and the city of York. In view of demographic variables, their age is 60 (Mary) and 58 (Eric). They are both retired and highly educated, Mary 's previous occupation being biology professor and Eric 's architect. Their religion is Catholic, race white and nationality British. Their gross income is   80.000 per annum and their budget for the holidays is   1300. According to Brassington and Pettit 's (2000) Family Life Cycle model they could be categorized as Empty nesters: they are older and retired with no children living at home. In light of psychographic variables their social class is upper middles and their personality ambitious and active. Considering behavioural characteristics the benefits they seek from the holidays are action, discovery and health. Consumers can also be classified according to where they live. Numerous specialist companies, including CACI, offer geodemographic databases, such as ACORN, which categorises 1.9 million UK postcodes. Considering the place of residence and the postcode of analysed customers (YO1 4PD), the appropriate classification category is Urban Prosperity, the suitable group is Prosperous Professionals and the correct type is Older Professionals in detached houses and apartments (ACORN, 2003).
This part of the coursework will focus on channel evaluation from a consumer perspective. Web site design and effectiveness will be analysed using the AID-10 website evaluation framework. Privacy, trust and security issues will also be evaluated. The three selected distribution channels for evaluation are an aggregator (Cosmos), an integrator (Expedia) and six principals (Fosshotel, Avis, Icelandair, Insurefor.com, BCP and Iceland Excursions). Detailed information supporting the evaluation can be found in appendices.
Access to Cosmos Web site is straightforward and is easily found in a search engine; however, download time is more than 30 seconds on 56kbps modem and could therefore be improved. The Web site makes adequate use of graphics but is not very impressive. Colours used are relatively bright and from the customer 's perspective not particularly pleasant for the eyes. Moreover, some of the fonts used are relatively small and therefore not very easy to read. The Web site is not well organized and as such does not present itself in a very professional way. It can be argued that too many frames and tables are used on the Web site. Moreover, line widths are not particularly easy to read and there could be more 'white' space on the site, allowing the text to 'breathe'. In terms of accessibility, the site can be rated as poor (2) as it has 10 errors and warnings of the priority level one and also other checkpoints at level two and three. Navigating through the Web pages is fairly straightforward, but could be improved. There is also one dead link on the Web site. In terms of search capabilities, the site can be rated as average as it only offers 'Site map' feature. There is a good mixture of standard and unique features (such as 'Destination Information' and 'Travel Extras') on the Web site; however, there is still room for improvement. In terms of personalization the site can be rated as poor (2). Customer is not able to choose from different languages and can not say his/her preferences regarding the seat on the flight, meal etc. The site does not 'remember' the registered visitors. Online transactions are available; however, there is no feature 'Help with booking' and no offline payment option offered. The Web site is protected by Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) encryption. In TrustGauge Scoring Chart the Web site is rated with number 2, which means that it is not recognized as particularly trustworthy by others. From the above discussion it can be concluded that Cosmos Web site can be rated as average (3) (See Table 1 and Appendix 2 for details).
Expedia Web site is easy to access with user friendly URL address. Moreover, it is quick and easy to find in a search engine as it is the first result of organic search. The content level is particularly relevant to the Web site, information provided is useful, up-to-date and written and presented in a professional way. Navigating the Web site is straightforward and there are no bad links. In terms of search capabilities, the site can be rated as average as there is only 'Site map' feature available. A good use is made of unique features increasing the overall appeal of the Web site. In terms of personalization/interactivity the Web site can be rated as excellent. Customer is invited to create his/her own account and can provide Expedia with preferences regarding holidays, which are then stored for the future use. The Web site uses cookies and 'remembers' the registered visitors as well as greets them by name on future visits. Interactive maps are also available. Registration process is quick and easy with online assistance offered. Customer receives a confirmation of purchase via email. However, no offline payment is available. Customer feels safe to provide his personal and credit card details on the Web site as encryption on the payment Web page is high and security certificates available. Moreover, if a customer does not want to send his/her credit card over the internet, an option is available to call an Expedia agent, who then enters the credit card number into a secured data file. According to TrustGauge the Web site is recognized as moderately trustworthy by others. Overall, Expedia Web site can be rated as good (4) (See Table 1 and Appendix 2 for details).
Detailed information about evaluation of the principals can be found in Table 2 below and in the appendix 2.
Fosshotel Web site can be easily found in a search engine as it is the first result of the organic search. Download time, however, could be improved. In terms of graphics, there is a good combination between images and text and soft colours are used. Nonetheless, it could be argued that the fonts used are relatively small and quite difficult for customer to read. In terms of layout, grids are used wisely to allow a better organization of the Web site. Nonetheless, line widths could be improved as they are not very easy to read; there could also be more 'white' space on the Web site, allowing the text to 'breathe'. Navigating the Web site is extremely easy, navigation bar is provided and there are no dead links. Unique features increase the overall appeal of the Web site; however, there is still room for improvement. In terms of personalization, there is a wide variety of linguistic options available when booking is made; however, no personalization is achieved after registration. Online transactions are available but there is no feature 'Help with booking' and no offline payment option offered. The reservation system is secured with the use of Secure Sockets Layer. According to TrustGauge the Web site is unrated. The overall mark for Fosshotel Web site is average (3).
Avis Web site can be fairly easily accessed as the URL address is user friendly and the site can be quickly found in a search engine. The content is relevant, useful and written in a professional way. In terms of search capability, there is still room for improvement and a search engine could possibly be provided. Considering value adding features, the Web site can be rated as average and some additional features could be offered. The Web site is well organized and structured and navigation through the Web pages can be achieved with ease. There are no bad links. In terms of accessibility, the Web site can be rated as average. Registration process is quick and easy, adequate guidance is offered and customer can manage his/her bookings online at any time. Offline payment option, however, is not available. Encryption is high and security certificate, which ensures customer that the Web site is authentic and secure, is provided. On TrustGauge Scoring Chart the Web site is rated with number 3, meaning that the site is recognized as somewhat trustworthy by others. From the above discussion it can be concluded that the Avis Web site can be rated as good (4).
Icelandair Web site can be accessed easily and quickly. Information provided is relevant, accurate and written in a professional way. In terms of graphics, there is a good balance between text and images on the Web site; however, the images are mostly generic photographs of nature etc., with only one of them being a photograph of Icelandair aeroplanes. Navigating through the Web pages is straightforward and no dead links were found through NetMechanic. An advantage of the Web site is that customer has an option of choosing bigger fonts while browsing the Web site. Overall, a good level of personalization is achieved. Nevertheless, the customer can only choose his/her preferences regarding seats, but not regarding meals. Online booking assistance is provided with every step of the booking process clearly explained. However, offline payment option is not available. The Web site is protected by SSL encryption. According to TrustGauge the Web site is not particularly trustworthy. Overall, Icelandair Web site can be rated as 4 (good).
The main disadvantage of the Web site is that it does not have any search capabilities available. In terms of personalization, the Web site can be rated as poor (2), as it does not give any personal attention to visitor, does not use cookies to store his/her contact information nor offer any language choices. On the other hand, the Web site is fairly easy to access and the standards of content and graphics are good .Navigation through the Web pages can be achieved with ease; navigation bar as well as internal and external links are provided, however there is one dead link on the Web site. Online transactions are available and a good level of guidance is offered. Security certificates are provided together with additional information about security of the payment page to reduce customer 's concern about the possible misuse of his/her credit card details. The overall score for the Web site is average (3).
BCP Web site is extremely easy to access with very fast download time. Moreover, it contains a number of value adding features, which increase the overall appeal of the Web site. Online transaction is fast, assistance available and security certificates provided; however, there is no offline payment option offered and there is one bad link on the Web site. In terms of graphics the Web site can be rated as poor (2). From the customer 's perspective a very bright yellow colour, which is used for the background, is not particularly pleasant for the eye. In addition, there are no relevant images on the Web site, related to car parking. Moreover, the font used is relatively small. The site does not include 'About us' feature. There is a lack of personalization and interactivity on the Web site and from this perspective it can be rated as poor (2). 'Customer help' and 'Contact us' features are available and customer is invited to subscribe to BCP eNewsletter; however, a booking procedure is a standardized one, visitors special needs are not considered and his information not stored for the future use. Overall, BCP Web site can be rated as average (3).
The Web site can be accessed easily and quickly. The content level is extremely relevant to the Web site. Useful search features are offered to the visitor. The Web site is well conceived and constructed; nevertheless, it could be argued that it lacks 'white' space between texts. One bad link was found through NetMechanic. Considering personalization and interactivity element, the Web site can be rated as poor (2). After the registration the Web site does not remember the visitor. The customer, however, can choose between two different languages. With regard to online transactions, the Web site is secured and encrypted by SSL. A disadvantage of the Web site is that the customer can get the price for the excursions only in Iceland Kronas (ISK). Overall, the Iceland Excursion Web site can be rated as good.
In terms of privacy, most of the evaluated Web sites are committed to protecting customer privacy and using the information lawfully. On Expedia, Cosmos, Icelandair, BCP, Avis and Insurefor.com Web sites privacy policies/statements are available and are clearly explained to the customer. On the Fosshotel and Iceland Excursions Web sites, however, privacy policy is not visibly stated.
When making price comparison it can be noted that Aggregator (Cosmos) offers the best price to the customer and that the principals' price is the highest. However, one needs to take into account that the three travel packages were not exactly identical, as Cosmos offered coach transportation to the hotel, whereas with Expedia and principals the car was hired.
When comparing the three channels it can be concluded that booking holidays through intermediaries is more convenient for the customer than booking through principals. Cosmos price is the lowest; however, with Expedia the product can be designed and delivered according to specific individual 's needs. From customer 's perspective booking through principals is not very convenient as it is more expensive as well as time consuming. Customers' overall holiday booking experience was the best when booking through Expedia.
COSMOS: Firstly, Cosmos Web site 's download time could be improved to enhance customer satisfaction. According to Chaffey (2002), a good page design should allow the user to change the size of text. As some of the fonts used on Cosmos Web site are relatively small, Cosmos should provide a customer with an option of changing them into bigger ones. Very bright colours of the Web site are not particularly attractive from the customer 's perspective. Cosmos should consider this if targeting older customers. The structure of the Web site could be improved, the amount of frames and tables reduced and the line widths increased. There should be no bad links on the Web site. Cosmos should pay particular attention to navigation facilities as navigating the Web site can be rather difficult for the customer. On some of the Web pages there is no feature 'Home' available to enable the customer to return to Cosmos Home page, which can be rather confusing. Online information search capabilities are important to provide users access to the information they require easily and quickly (Adam et al. , 1999). Cosmos should consider offering a search engine on its Web site. In terms of value adding features, some additional could be introduced, such as 'Maps' or 'Fare watcher'. The Web site should also be improved in terms of personality and interactivity. Language options should be offered and visitor 's basic information together with his/her preferences stored for the future use. Easily accessible customer support should also be available.
EXPEDIA: Expedia Web site could be improved in terms of search capabilities. A search engine as well 'What 's new' functionality could be offered to allow customers easy and fast access to the required information. In terms of unique features, 'Fare watcher' feature could be introduced. There should be an option of other payment methods, such as for example sending a cheque by post, if a customer does not want to pay online. Expedia offers additional services such as attractions and airport parking. However, attractions for Iceland can only be booked until the end of year 2006 (less than a month ahead), which is not very convenient from the customer perspective. Expedia should consider this and improve their offer by making bookings available up to six months, for example. Another recommendation for Expedia would be to introduce intelligent agents (avatars) as a part of their Web site service. Avatars can be described as a piece of software which acts similar to human agents. They can become customer 's personal assistants, performing different tasks for them as well as possessing an enormous amount of information about them together with their preferences (Werthner and Klein, 1999; O'Connor, 1999).
FOSSHOTEL: Firstly, download time of Fosshotel Web site could be improved. Secondly, Fosshotel should consider introducing an option for the customer to choose either smaller or bigger fonts when browsing the Web site. Regarding the value adding feature, Fosshotel could perhaps add a feature 'Maps of Iceland'. Visitors, browsing the Web site, should feel that their special needs are attended to. Therefore, Fosshotel should consider giving more personal attention to customers and possibly introduce an option, where consumers can express their preferences regarding the room, meals etc. There should be an option of other payment methods in case a customer does not want to pay online.
AVIS: According to Kerr (1999), the users should be able to find the information they are looking for with the minimum of backtracking or unnecessary browsing. Avis 's own search engine could improve search capability of the Web site and thus enhance customer satisfaction. Unique features increase the overall appeal of the Web site; however, Avis could possibly add some additional value adding features such as current gas prices or regulations with regard to driving in different countries. Offline payment options should also be on offer.
ICELANDAIR: On the Icelandair Web site the use of images could be improved from generic to more relevant and specific ones, showing Iceland aeroplanes with their logos and thus enhancing the company 's brand. In terms of personalization, Icelandair could offer customers to choose their preferences regarding meals and thus potentially increase their satisfaction.
INSUREFOR.COM: Chaffey (2002) believes that since the use of navigation system may not enable the customer to find the information they want rapidly, alternatives should be provided, such as for example search and advanced search facilities. Insurefor.com should particularly focus on improving its Web site 's search capabilities, as the Web site does not offer any search features to the customer. The company should consider giving more personal attention to the customer by offering a variety of language options, based on country target markets. Web site should also store basic customer 's information and offer them suggestions of additional services or information based on their preferences. Insurefor.com should make sure there are no dead links on the Web site as they decrease customer satisfaction.
BCP: A possible modification of BCP Web site 's visual design, particularly the bright yellow background colour, should be considered if targeting older customers. Moreover, the size of some parts of the text should be altered or an option given to the customer of choosing bigger fonts. BCP should also apply more relevant images, related to car parking, to its Web site to make it more appealing to the user. According to Chaffey (2002) features such as Home, Main Page, Search, FAQ, Help and About Us are a necessary part of every Web site. As BCP Web site does not offer 'Home' and 'About us' features, it is recommended that the company applies them to their Web site. Personalization is another issue of which BCP should think of; customer 's special needs and preferences with regard to car parking should be addressed (for example, customers could choose a specific parking space or could choose an option of having their cars washed while parked).
ICELAND EXCURSIONS: In terms of Web site layout, Iceland Excursions could consider having more 'white space' between the text, allowing it to 'breathe' and thus making the Web site clearer and more appealing to the customer. Another issue, worth considering, is having a currency converter available on the Web site as customers can get the price for the excursions only in Iceland Kronas (ISK). Iceland Excursions should also ensure that there are no bad links on the Web site, providing the customer with a positive experience and a good impression of the company. Personalization is another issue that should be improved. Web site accounts could possibly be available not only to travel agents but to customers as well, allowing Iceland Excursions to store customers' information and preferences and keep them informed about special offers based on their preferences.
All of the analyzed Web sites should consider improving Web accessibility as most of them were rated average on this criterion. Web sites should therefore become more user-friendly for people with disabilities. Moreover, all of the Web sites were rated with a score 5 or lower in TrustGauge scoring chart, meaning that they were not recognized as particularly trustworthy by many users. As trust has become a vital antecedent for purchasing online (McCole, 2002), companies should make sure to increase trustworthiness of their Web sites.
Security is also of a great importance to maintain trust amongst customers. From the customer perspective, all of the analysed Web sites can be rated as good in terms of security, as their payment Web pages are highly encrypted and security certificates provided. It is important, however, for companies to make sure that once security measures are in place, an appropriate amount of content on the Web site is devoted to security issues to reassure the customer that online transactions on the web Site are safe (Chaffey, 2002). Expedia, Cosmos, Avis, Fosshotel, BCP and Insurefor.com devote a reasonable amount of content on their Web site to security issues; however, it could be argued that Icelandair and particularly Iceland Excursions should improve in terms of explaining and reassuring the customer that online booking through their Web sites is safe and secure.
The assignment has analysed three different electronic distribution channels from a customer perspective. All of the evaluated Web sites have their advantages as well as disadvantages and the analyzed organizations should work towards their improvement to enhance customer satisfaction. From consumers' point of view, integrator 's (Expedia) Web site provided the best overall holiday booking experience.
Technological developments in the future will combine more powerful technology, delivering more convergence as well as more tension in distribution channel between various actors (Bowie and Paraskevas, 2006). It is widely reported that consumers will be the major winners of technological developments, as they will have more choice, more interactivity as well as more personalized products to choose from (Buhalis, 2003). According to Bowie and Paraskevas (2006), a new electronic distribution channel, the "multigrator", will emerge with convergence of principals', intermediaries' and search engines' offer to customers.
