There are many different suggestions by academics to what is the meaning of the word hospitality. Jones suggest :"hospitality is made up of two distinct services - the provision of overnight accommodation for people staying away from home and the provision of sustenance for people dining away from home" (1996 :137). The essay aims to look at a balanced argument of how successful the commercial sectors of hospitality are at what they are aiming to do. The essay will then progress onto gaining a greater insight into the operations of hospitality both commercially and privately, taking into consideration the points of Telfer (2000) on host and guests motives. An evaluation will then be made taking different academics viewpoints into account of whether people are working in commercial hospitality just because it is a lucrative market or if the people within this industry are genuinely hospitable.
There has been an ongoing debate between academics to what is the most useful way of understanding hospitality. Academics such as Lashley (1999) use the three domain approach to gain a greater insight into the structure of the hospitality industry. However Slattery (2002) suggests this approach which is taken by many academics demeans the hospitality industry. The three domain approach focuses on three spheres of hospitality activities; these include the commercial, social and private domains. Lashley understands hospitality as: "a set of behaviour which originates in the foundations of society" (Lashley 1999 ). He suggests it originates from generosity and sharing food from hunting. He proposes there should be a meaning for hospitality which takes into account the three sectors and how each sector has an impact on the other one (Lashley 1999.) In the social domain of activities Lashley (1999) suggests there are many cultural differences, for example in some societies there is need for people to be welcoming and hospitable to strangers as well as the disadvantaged members of society. Heal (1990 cited in King 1995) proposes that in her study of hospitality in Elizabethan times between 1400 and 1700 generosity was a key element of hospitality and food and drink were given both to friends and strangers of all social standings. However in our western society hospitality is more of a private activity and people entertain out of choice thus there is no social obligation to invite wider parts of the community. If we take Telfer 's (2000) views into account, host motives have also changed. For example people will not entertain guests in today 's western society to make themselves of a higher social standing or they will not entertain guests thinking as a result of this invitation they will become more socially mobile.
When looking at Lashley (1999) he takes a some what sociological point of view when suggesting that the nuclear family in the private setting shapes activities in the commercial setting. He suggests that the private setting of hospitality makes us think of the roles that each of us perform when either giving or receiving hospitality. He suggests that in such establishments as bed and breakfasts and pubs which are usually run by families, the nuclear setting is the main reception for the commercial guests. Rybczynski (1998 cited in Lynch and MacWhannell) supports this view from a historical point of view and also proposes that in the seventeenth century the term 'hotel' usually referred to the large townhouses of the wealthy which were extremely luxurious and well appointed. Riley (1984 cited in Lynch and MacWhannell) proposes that as these aristocrats had such high living standards, this became a model for commercial hospitality and a benchmark for the type of service and quality required in this sector. It can be suggested from a historical context that residences of aristocrats were one of the main ways of setting standards for luxury hotels.
Lashley (1999) in his argument goes on to suggest that commercial hospitality is more formal and differs quite some much from the private domain, for example many restaurants or hotels will have a preferred way for guests to dress during certain times of the day. He goes onto say that in commercial hospitality guests can demand things they would not usually dream of when say going to a friend 's house for dinner. A good example in a restaurant could be a customer requesting the chef to hurry up making the food if they are in a hurry, however guests at a friends house would almost never do this! Lashley (1999) is supported by Telfer (2000) who applies her work to hotels, she suggests that guests can feel free in hotels to use the facilities when they like or according to market demand as they have nothing to give in return but money. Telfer (2000) argues that this type of hospitality is not hospitable. Instead it is argued by her that there are no feelings involved between the host and guest and backs up Lashleys reasoning that this type of hospitality is all to do with market forces instead.
Lashley (1999) goes on argue that there is a vast difference between being genuinely wanted and welcomed say at a friends house for dinner thus being a truly valued guest, and being a valued guest say at a hotel one stays at regularly for business. He goes onto suggest some commercial companies try to bring aspects of intimacy into the private sphere but sometimes do not succeed. He gives the example of Harvester restaurants where waiters are told to treat guests as though they were in their own home. This author suggests it is difficult for commercial companies to take aspects of the private sphere and put them in to practice. This is mainly due to the fact that one sphere is charged for and the other is not, thus some aspects of intimacy are totally lost in commercial hospitality for example deciding on how much to tip your waiter, or feeling that you have been overcharged for a meal. However an alternative viewpoint can be taken that when one is a guest of a commercial host, there is no obligation whatsoever for the guest to reverse the roles with their host. Aspects of intimacy such as 'treating guests as if they were in your own home' can work quite well especially in such countries at the USA where the majority of private entertaining is done out of the home. Thus even though when one entertains in commercial setting aspects of intimacy can work well to a certain extent.
This author will now look at branded hospitality which many suggest is usually a result of globalisation and standardisation. It can be difficult to meet all customers' desires and provide intimate service as well as meeting specific needs of each customer. Chains such as Holiday Inn in the accommodation sector or Pizza Hut in the catering sector are both international, standardised companies, customers expect a certain standard of service from them. However the service given is not as personal as say a local pub or restaurant. (Mikula and Kye-Sung (1997 cited in Brotherton 2003) suggest these companies should 'think local - act global' thus these global branded companies can maybe offer a more personal service to their guests in a way which is local to the country they are operating in. McDonalds is a good example of a globalized company which offers a standardised service but varies its food according to the country it operates in. A clear example is a McDonalds which serves halal meat only in its branches in Malaysia. Even though the service might be the same world wide many customers may feel that the company is operating on a local level as in this case they are appreciating the religious beliefs of a specific country.
Lashley puts forward the argument that as commercial hospitality is based on money exchange this restricts the amount of pleasure a commercial host can give to their guests. For example if a guest has ordered a buffet meal in a restaurant the waiter will not be able to also give him al a carte dishes with the buffet. Both Lashley (1999) and Telfer (2000) suggest that commercial hosts have motives but they are mostly ulterior ones. Lashley (1999) proposes commercial hosts are hospitable to their guests but only to a certain limit where guests will be satisfied with the service they have received, and will not complain but instead return again. The customer in a restaurant has no mutual obligation, as the roles of host and guest will never be reversed as they usually are in the private sphere. Slattery (2002) however criticises Lashley (1999) on the fact that he suggests pleasure is compromised, depending on how much money is exchanged during say a meal. It is suggested by Slattery (2002) that this interpretation should not be accepted as he feels not only will it affect the future growth of the hospitality industry but it also disproves historical evidence on how the hospitality industry has been able to grow.
Lashley (1999) makes a point that many commercial companies do run loyalty schemes so they are able to set up a base of trusting customers who they attempt to give a more personal level of service to. Carper (1992 cited in Lashley 1999) suggests it is much easier to keep a base of loyal customers than attract new ones. He concludes that guests of commercial hosts should be rewarded in specific ways for their loyalty to a company. This author agrees with Lashley on the fact that it 's difficult where to get a balance of how to be hospitable, for example a hotel can not put Elizabethan hospitality into practice. It would be impossible today for a hotel to be giving away free nights to all its loyal customers as a way of showing appreciation. Instead Lashley (1999) has suggested individual customers can be made to feel unique in different ways: "a judicious consideration of how regular customers can be rewarded with extra benefits, which celebrate their importance and uniqueness as individuals, could be successful" (Lashley 1999). A clear example of this could be front desk staff remembering frequent guests names or blocking a preferred bedroom for a regular guest.
Telfer (2000) suggests in the commercial sector hosts do not have a choice of who they entertain, so in some cases we can not talk about individual host motives. She goes onto argue that instead one should look into why people in commercial hospitality work there in the first place. Telfer (2000) reasons that many people are working in hospitality just as a way of financially surviving and not because they are generous or caring people, or as Heal (1990 cited in King 1995) suggested how people behaved in Elizabethan times. Telfer (2000) however does suggest there are many people working in commercial hospitality as they want a job which resembles that of a private host and also they genuinely are welcoming people.
Telfer (2000) suggests the profit motive or money exchange also plays a big part in commercial hospitality. She suggests as all aspects of commercial hospitality are businesses so their main aim is to make a profit. However these are not the only self regarding motives as Telfer (2000) refers to them. Commercial hosts such as private hosts both can have self regarding motives for example the ostentatious restaurateur and the showy host at a house may only be self interested in showing of culinary skills or dining sets instead of really caring about the welfare of their guests. She suggests that even though the guest and host relationship is like a business transaction many guests do not see it that way. Telfer (2000) puts forward the point that many people go to restaurants or hotels to get away from the stress of everyday life. An example she gives is that many people find a confidant in their bar man at their local pub. However Telfer (2000) does point out that the customer becomes a friend of the bar tender thus this may no longer be commercial hospitality, but instead a friendly relationship. Telfer (2000) is supported by Mullins (1998) who proposes that profit has to be one of the main targets for a commercial business to survive and grow. Fearn (Cited in Mullins 1998) supports Mullins (1998) view but suggests profit should be a reward for treating customers well.
Slattery (2002) has proposed that the three domain approach ignores and degrades many areas of hospitality which are extremely useful areas for teaching and research in hospitality. He argues that authors such as Telfer (2000) lack substance in their argument for example she does not define what is entailed in looking after guests well. Slattery suggests that the private sphere in the three domain approach is irrelevant. He believes the whole idea of the hospitality industry is that the activities take place out of the home in specific venues for example hotels, restaurants and banqueting halls. Slattery (2002) suggests entertaining family or friends in your residence is merely a routine activity and should n't be included in the approach. He also makes a highly important point that in commercial hospitality the relationship is between buyers and sellers. This author agrees with Slattery when he criticises the authors of 'In Search of Hospitality' on the fact that they view customers in the commercial sector as guests. Slattery (2002) goes onto criticise that because the host and guest relationship is applied to both the private and commercial spheres it is for the reason that because customers have to pay in the commercial sphere, it comes out inferior.
This author suggests it is difficult to take the viewpoints of Slattery (2002) or Lashley (1999) in today 's society where hospitality is so diverse. We need to look at individual aspects of the industry such as what the customer needs and how to accomplish them. In the past decade we have seen new aspects occurring in different parts of hospitality for example six star hotels such as the Burj Al Arab Tower Hotel in Dubai which is a new dimension in luxury hotels. As Slattery (2002) suggests "the hospitality industry is represented in every country in the world and is diverse and complex." As for globalisation and standardised companies such as Marriott and TGI Fridays Mikula and Kye Sung 's (1997 cited in Brotherton 2003) points are clearly valid. We need to see these and other global companies not only work on a more local basis but also see their service become more intimate and personal from the workforce side. It can be concluded that the three domain approach is useful to some extent in the 21 st century; however we need to look at things from a more micro scale such as looking at individual customers' wants and needs. As for money exchange this does have some affect however we also need to take into account other self regarding motives which can sometimes have a greater affect on the service given.
