Obesity epidemic is a constantly growing, serious social problem. Many institutions and organizations all over the world joined together in order to combat the obesity wave, which has already been present in Europe.
As obesity is a very complex phenomenon multi-factorial and multi-stakeholders actions are being undertaken on all the levels: global, transatlantic, regional, national, state, provincial and local.
The World Health Organization and the Consumers International represent main bodies fighting with obesity problem on the global level.
In Europe, the European Commission, the European Food Safety Agency, the European Consumers' Organizations (BEUC), the European Associations of Advertisers and representatives of European food industry such as the Confederation of the Food and Drink Industries of the EU (CIAA), try to combat the problem. Representatives of the food industry say as they are part of the problem, they want to be a part of the solution (3). Also multinationals such as Coca - Cola are participating in the action. Recently Coca - Cola has declared to withdraw fizzy drinks vending machines form all the primary schools all over the Europe till the end of 2006 (8).
On the national level, in particular in Britain, where the problem is more serious but also better highlighter in the battle against the obesity participate: government and government bodies such as the Food Safety Authority (FSA), the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA), as well as NGOs such as the National Heart Forum and the Consumers' Association known as 'WHICH?', local councils, and many others.
In Poland, where the problem still seems to be new and no much data is available on obesity and overweigh among children, Polish government has just undertaken work on the implementation of WHO strategy on Diet, Physical Activity and Health (DPAS) (9). In Poland works conducted by government are supported by contribution form state institutions such as the National Food and Nutrition Institute, consumer organizations such as Consumers' Federation as well as representatives of the Polish food industry - Polish Federation of Food Industry, which at the early beginning of 2006 started running a programme 'Keep fit', promoting healthy lifestyles and balanced diets among children (7).
As the obesity wave is moving from the West to the East many alliances have been created. The best example of trans Atlantic cooperation aimed at combating obesity epidemic on both sides of the Atlantic is the Trans Atlantic Consumer Dialogue, which on the beginning of December 2005 organized together with BEUC a conference 'Generation Excess II - a review of transatlantic approaches to tackling obesity and diet-related disease' (4). Presently, Central and Eastern European countries should be taking precautions and learning from its western neighbours.
On the European level, the European Commission lunched The European Platform on Diet, Physical Activity and Health, whose main duty is to bring together all the stakeholders and keep works against obesity on the track. Issues raised in the Commission 's Green Paper on 'Promoting healthy diets and physical activity: a European dimension for the prevention of overweight, obesity and chronic diseases' are supposed to be commented on till 15 th of March 2006 in order to help elaborate comprehensive European strategy (1). Especially questions such as marketing, advertising and labelling of food commodities aimed at children are of crucial importance. Also all the actions aiming at increasing public awareness about the obesity and obesity related health risks as well as informed food choices are worth serious consideration. Last but not least, sound promotion of active lifestyle and healthy diet still remains crucial.
From all the above reasons many social campaigns have been undertaken. Among the most popular are: 'Grab 5', '5 a day', 'Media smart' (2) and recently launched in Poland 'Keep fit'. They are run by governments, NGOs and industry, and usually present top to down approach. According to the one of the main EU principles - the principle of subsidiary, down to top approach seem to be the most fruitful one, as it allows for best identification of the problem on the local ground and because of it, can address it properly and adequately, receiving this way the best results. That is why anti obesity actions on the local level should be undertaken. The survey I am just about to conduct aims to provide a better understanding of children 's demands, attitudes and perceptions of physical activities and healthy diets in order to adequately address their needs and elaborate effective strategies to combat the obesity problem on the local level.
Survey method: to pursue the project objective I decided on exploratory research. I am going to collect primary data using direct method technique. The questionnaire will be distributed among parents of primary school children during monthly parents assembly in the local schools of the disadvantaged urban area of Wales. The questionnaire will be also distributed among school teachers and social workers. 500 questionnaires are planned to be given out, from which about 400 are expected to be returned.
Sampling methods: parents of primary school children from the local area. Also teachers and social workers who work closely with children on their everyday basis, so know their needs and problems very well.
Investigated problem: what kind of activities promoting healthy lifestyle and balanced diet may result attractive for children in the local area what kind of programmes local council may propose to encourage kids to switch to healthier diets and make sensitive and informed food choices.
Research design:
My aim among others is to formulate hypothesis about different activities, which the local council is planning to run in the future and assess how parents and children feel about them.
Budget:
Fixed costs, costs of print, delivery to schools and collection of the questionnaire will be covered by the local council. Out of   2 500 budget,   500 will go for questionnaire design,   1 000 for data input and   1 000 for questionnaire analysis and preparation of the final report.
Project aims:
Survey objectives:
Collect primary data from parents of primary school children through a field work across disadvantage urban area of Wales in order to asses what kind of activities provided by the local council will meet children 's needs best and in the same time contribute to the fight against obesity in the local area.
Who should be contacted?.
Parents of the primary school children in the local area, but also teachers and social workers who work with children on their daily basis and know their needs and problems very well.
What information should be obtained from respondents?.
In what kind of activities children would like to be involved. When and where the activity should be run and what character they should have.
When should the information be obtained from the respondents?.
During the forthcoming monthly parents assembly.
Where the respondents should be contacted to obtain the required information?.
At the monthly parents assembly at the primary schools in the local area.
Why we are we obtaining the information form the respondents?.
Because there is a need to organize anti-obesity activities and workshops run by the local council. The aim is to supply children with activities, which will best meet their needs.
Way: In which way are we going to obtain information from the respondents?.
Distributing questionnaire and collecting the primary data form parents of primary school children, primary school teachers and social workers.
Presently, obesity is a common social problem, by some it is even called an epidemic as the rate of obese and overweight children keeps on growing. According to the estimates of the National Statistics Office in the UK in 2002 1 in 6 children were obese (6). Many social project and initiatives all over the country are being undertaken in order to face the phenomenon, decrease those figures and in the long term prevent many chronic diseases. That is why local council wants to start its own battle against obesity and overweight within our area. Our basic idea is to increase number of activities promoting active lifestyle and healthy diet. To address the issue as well as we only can, we need your help.
The purpose of the survey is to determine what kind of activities provided by the local council will be most welcomed by children. You will be asked about the views and opinions your child / children my have on different project we are planning to implement. By filling in this questionnaire you will help us to prepare tailor made activities for children form the local community. Contributing to the survey you will also contribute to health and well being of your daughter(s) or son(s).
All the data from the survey is strictly confidential and is collected only on the purpose of this particular project. If there are any questions you do not understand or do not wish to answer than please feel free to miss them out.
Thank you very much for your time and your co-operation.
With best regards,.
Local council representative.
