Freezing is a well established method of preserving foods whilst maintaining a high quality. It is better than any other method at preserving taste, texture and nutritional quality.
The objective of freezing is to maintain the original characteristics of the product as much as possible. Possible quality issues in frozen foods include diffusion of water, protein denaturation and lipid oxidation.
There are two main stages of the freezing process. The first is nucleation in which ice crystals begin to form. These crystals increase in size, the rate of which is determined by the rate of reaction at the crystal surface, rate of water diffusing to the growing crystal and the rate of heat removal. The second stage is heat removal from the product. This will depend on the physical dimensions of the product such as volume and density. The specific heat of the product and therefore its thermal conductivity are also factors.
Plate freezers, as used in the first experiment are a type of contact freezer. This means the product is in direct contact with the freezing medium, in this case sandwiched between two plates. Cold refrigerant flows through the gaps in between the plates which chills the plates and in turn freezes the product. There are two forms of the plate freezer, vertical and horizontal. For this experiment a horizontal plate freezer was used, it is more common for packaged food.
Enzymatic activity can result in quality degradation in frozen foods. Lowering the temperature of food below its freezing point can alter enzyme activity due to changes in the environment such as pH, ionic strength and solute concentrations. Hydrolytic activities can result in textural softening and colour loss, although the main problem associated with frozen fruit products is enzymatic browning.
In fruits enzymatic browning is caused by polyphenol oxidase. In order for enzymatic browning to occur, the enzyme, substrate and oxygen must all be present. If one or more of this factors is missing, enzymatic browning can be retarded or delayed. Treatments to prevent this from occurring are based on this principle.
No changes were made to the written procedures. *Example Calculation.
The shapes of the cooling curves are typical in shape. Between the 15 th and 105 th minute, the cooling curves represent a pre-cooling stage. The temperature drops rapidly then levels out into a plateau. Between the 110 th and 200 th minute, there is further rapid cooling followed by a settling of the temperature. This represents a change in phase. From the 205 th minute onwards, the curves, except for tray 4, show a gradual increase in temperature as the freezer was switched off. Tray 4 enters a tempering phase where it cools to the ultimate temperature.
The freezing of food is influenced on the thermal properties of the food and the physical dimensions of the product.
As the packages all started at different temperatures, it is not possible to say exactly how long it took for each package to reach -10 oC. However, it is possible to measure how long it took for each sample to reach up to -10 oC, see table 2. This shows that generally, as the bulk density increases, the time to freeze the package also increases.
In packaged food, the material presents some resistance to heat transfer. This resistance is increased by trapped air. Heat transfer through solid objects is through conduction. Heat transfer from a solid to air is by conduction and partial convection. There needs to be a substantial movement of air for this to occur. Heat transfer by conduction in the gas becomes negligible compared with heat transfer through convection. This would mean that the Tray 1 with whole peas, the lowest bulk density, should take longest to freeze. However this relationship was not observed.
Heat absorption is dependent on the specific heat of the product and its density. As the bulk density increases in the packages, it can be assumed there is an increase in thermal conductivity. This is due to a decrease in porosity that would be apparent. The increase in density and therefore mass, means that heat is retained in the product for longer. More energy is required to remove the heat from the peas. It can be assumed that as the density increases the specific heat has also increased, as more energy was required to decrease the temperature. Energy leaves the system more evenly which takes longer to complete.
No changes were made to the written procedures.
All samples had a softer texture and a watery mouthfeel.
The level of enzymatic browning varies across the samples. When fruits are frozen, their structure is disrupted which leads to a decrease in the turgidity. This was observed in the control sample. They were very soft in texture. They also had the highest level of browning. Fruits that are to be used for freezing must be prepared before to ensure they maintain optimum quality.
The blanched samples had retained their apple colour although there was some slight browning around the core, where it was removed. Blanching is used to inactivate polyphenol oxidase that causes browning. This is the simplest way of inactivating the enzyme. Blanching also removes air from the tissue and so the rate of oxidation is decreased during freezing and thawing. The samples had lost their sharp apple taste which may be a result of the heat treatment. If heated for too long, a cooked flavour may develop although this was not observed. Heating also softens the texture which was observed.
Sodium metabisulphate is the most common food additive used and is most effective in acid foods. The additive is an antioxidant and so prevents the reaction of polyphenol oxidase with oxygen which in turn causes browning. The samples appeared to have no apparent change in colour although there was a higher level of greenness at the core. The product did feel very wet and had maintained a sharper taste than the blanched apples.
The apples that were immersed in just a 65Bx sugar solution appeared to have approximately 40% browning but had still maintained an 'apple' taste although expectedly were sweeter than the control. By immersing the apples in sugar, oxygen is excluded from the fruit which should improve colour and appearance. The sugar acts as a barrier to oxygen but for this to be affective. This is achieved by withdrawing water from cells by osmosis. A higher concentrated solution is left inside the cells. This higher concentration depresses the freezing point inside the cells which means there is limited structural damage inside the cells and so there is less opportunity for the enzyme and substrate to collide in the cell and therefore less browning.
The addition of ascorbic acid to the 65Bx sugar solution is to prevent changes in colour and flavour that arise from oxidative enzymes which act after tissues in the fruit have been damaged. The results show that there was a significant level of browning, approximately 50% which is higher than the apple samples that were immersed in just sugar alone. Similarly to the previous sample, the prevention of browning is by the sugar acting as a barrier to oxygen. Ascorbic acid is a reducing agent which acts by keeping phenolic substances in a reduced and colourless state. This suggests that there should be less browning in this sample compared to the previous sample although this was not observed.
The apples that were immersed in a 3% brine solution for 3 minutes had a low level of browning compared to other samples. The appearance of these samples was quite acceptable, in comparison to the apples immersed in the sugar solution. Immersion into brine allows oxygen to be removed from the tissue, meaning there is less available to react with polyphenol oxidase. Similarly to the sugar solution, the freezing point inside the cell will have also decreased. However the concentration of NaCl required for effective prevention of browning in fruit is too high to be palatable. This was observed in the samples. The salty taste over powered any desirable fruity or apple taste in the sample. For this reason, NaCl may be used in conjunction with other ingredients such as ascorbic acid or citric acid.
