Prehistoric times span from the Palaeolithic (Stone Age) at 480,000 BP through to the Mesolithic, Neolithic, Bronze Ages and Iron Ages (just preceding Roman invasion). It is generally thought Britain was blanketed with woodland after the last glaciation, which began around 40,000 years BP during the Paleolithic period. Today, British people live in a landscape with greatly reduced woodland cover and a mosaic of different habitats such as the upland moorlands and lowland heath and grasslands.
The soils of Britain lie on bedrock laid down since the last glaciation, and their diversity is influenced by these foundations. Soil properties at a place at one time are partly determined also by the vegetation and organisms it supports (Avery, 1990). The current soils of Britain are shown in table 1.0.
Throughout England and lowland Wales, gley soils are present (mainly orthic or luvic, with associated brown soils). Pelo-calcaric brown or pelo-calcaric gley (calcareous clay) soils with associated brown and gley soils are distributed across central England reaching into the South West. Lowland areas of England and Wales contain brown soils, mainly luvic with associated gley soils.
Southern England downs (Wessex, South Downs), Gloucestershire, parts of Norfolk and east of the Pennines feature rendzinas or calcaric brown soils with associated brown luvic soils. Uplands of southern England, Wales, Pennines, parts of Lakes, southern and eastern Scotland contain brown soils, mainly sandy with associated rendzinas, podzols or gley soils. The highest peaks of Wales, the Pennines, north England, the Scottish Highlands and the Shetlands contain bog soils (blanket bog), stagnopodzols and humic (peaty) gley soils with associated rankers, lithosols and brown soils or podzols.
As vegetation and soil are intimately associated, Man 's influence on the environment must therefore have affected soil dynamics and development. This report aims to give an overview of Man 's impact on British soils during Prehistory, and if his activities assisted the development of the soils present today.
Tundra landscape prevailed especially in northerly areas until end of late-glacial period. Habitation seems to have been in caves. Tundra communities and woodland battled during this period, eventually seeing tundra disappear and woodland take over (Betula and Pinus scrub) as the climate improved. Grazing pressure on the land was alleviated to a degree by large mammal extinctions, leading to increased establishment of woody trees and shrubs. Improved climate allowed increase in human activity and population. Main animal food was horse and reindeer meat.
Humans mainly hunted animals for food. People seemed to prefer locations in or near valleys and lakeshores, and presumably also relied heavily on fish.
Humans still depended on animal hunting. High concentration of Upper Palaeolithic sites in the Mendips e.g. Badger Hole and Wookey Hole (Morrison, 1980).
The main ice cap had largely melted, though ice still remained on the Scottish Mountains. Ireland separated from Britain and Britain became isolated from the continent. Open deciduous woodland began to establish in the lowlands (Simmons, 1996).
The main diet was animal meat. Reedbeds were burned to create open water source areas to attract prey. Grazing animals may have prevented tree regeneration, allowing such openings to become grassland. The burnt soils of such areas were colonised by grasses to create pastures. Sites show evidence of pine burnt and hazel coming in e.g. Stump Cross, Yorkshire.
It has been suggested that Man encouraged Corylus by planting and burning pine. There is much evidence showing vast quantities of hazelnut shells, indicating a major part of Man 's diet at this time.
The landscape was a mosaic forest of irregular clearings (King, 2003).
This period saw the best climate since 20,000 years (Simmons, 1996). Cooler wetter summers and warmer wetter winters encouraged mat density of forest and shade-tolerant vegetation on rich brown earth soils across Britain. Increased precipitation promoted growth of peat in raised and blanket bogs in uplands of Britain, mainly the Highland Zone, exterminating large areas of woodland and other areas of vegetation (Morrison, 1980).
The population increased under the favourable climate. However, over-hunting made larger animals rare, increasing Man 's dependence on vegetation for food. The first forms of "protodomestication" developed, mainly in the form of animal husbandry (pigs). There was occasional growing of crops.
Evidence of forest clearance first appears during the Mesolithic period. People took advantage of natural clearings in the woodland but also deliberately manipulated the environment by clearing and burning (King, 2003). However, there was no advanced technology to fell trees yet, so fire and ring-barking were used (Simmons, 1996).
Pollen analysis has shown that Mesolithic people affected many sites in Britain, mainly by the effects of fire and grazing. There is evidence of substantial opening of forest cover on a southeast fen in Cambridgeshire (Smith et al., 1989). Heath replaced hazel woodland on Iping Common, Sussex, by fire or grazing (Keef et al., 1965). There is also evidence that Man used fire to alter the forest in favour of Alnus at the expense of hazel at Blacklane, Dartmoor (Simmons, 1964).
Climatic change in the later Mesolithic and soil maturation led to accumulation of mor humus over podzolic and gleyed soils. Some openings underwent rises in the water-table and became invaded by rushes and then accumulation of peat.
Moorland development in the uplands began, dominated by few species of grass, rush and sedge, replacing the former forest with more diverse fauna and flora (Simmons, 1996).
In North Gill, people created and maintained existing natural openings to attract animal prey by preventing regeneration. Fire was used to retain a grassy sward and prevent invasion of Pteridium (Simmons, 1996). At this site and many others in the uplands, loss of trees and decrease in vegetation cover and grazers (mainly wild animals) prevented regeneration. As a consequence, soil degradation by podzolisation occurred and much blanket peat developed (Simmons, 1969). The Alnus woodland of North Gill disappeared at around 6000 BP, replaced by encroaching blanket bog.
In general, Britain 's landscape was still predominantly wooded, though with moorlands beginning to develop in the uplands. Sporadic clearings, spatially and temporally, spanned Britain, used for stone, timber and earthen constructions and hunting (King, 2003). Woodland manipulation did not totally replace natural events; natural openings continued to form by natural processes.
People continued to use clearances already formed (natural and man-made) and cultivated the fertile soils where woodlands had formerly been. There was small-scale clearance from 5,200 BP in North Yorkshire Moors (Bartley et al., 1976).
There was much crop production under the favourable climate at this time and the human population boomed.
Across the more extensively cleared areas, high rainfall caused severe leaching of soil nutrients and soil erosion, especially in the uplands. Settlements and fields were abandoned in the northwest uplands, and regeneration of scrub occurred. Man 's dependency grew more on animal products and less on crops.
New forms of human social behaviour witnessed during 7500 to late 5000 BP, triggered by lack of resources. As well as retaining existing methods from earlier millennia, Neolithic subsistence included new cereal and increased importance of livestock management (King, 2003). Every area available for cultivation was used, leading to extensive areas of ploughed soil across Britain. Extensive woodland clearance was aided with new tools and fire.
The population stabilised at a lower level and farming was mixed (animals and crops). Crops, mainly emmer wheat (Triticum dicoccum), einkorn (Triticum monococcum) and barley, were cultivated (King, 2003). Neolithic people relied much on wild fauna and flora from woodland, rivers and coast, but livestock management became increasingly important (cattle, sheep, goats and pigs).
Clearances in Dartmoor are shown by fall in tree pollen and presence of clearance indicators e.g. Pteridium and Plantago lanceolata (Simmons, 1964). Clearances were generally followed by regeneration, indicating sparse Neolithic occupation in this area.
Extensive pastures led to the development of chalk grasslands. Expansion of grasses, P. lanceolata and Ericales occurred at this time. There was a big introduction of new weeds, which probably arrived from the continent by boat. Introduction of wild herbs in these pastures included Papaver, Sinapsis (white mustard, chicory - brassicas), Spergularia (Corn Spurrey - caryoph), and Atriplex (Orache - chenopodiaceae). Chenopods were cultivated by Neolithic Man.
Neolithic landscape was originally forested but was thinned by fire and grazing. Also increase in hazel shrubs. In more exposed higher areas, increase in blanket bog following podzolisation and high rainfall at this time.
Shallow tracts of peat in Exmoor began to develop in the Neolithic. Stock grazing in woodland under climatic deterioration and prolonged leaching caused the initiation of blanket peat (Moore, 1974). This was also the case in Wales. Shallow peats on sloping grounds (such as the Pennines, Lake District and central Wales) were initiated in the Neolithic. At Carneddau Hengwm, pollen analysis of underlying soils beneath the peat indicates former woodland cover, overlaid with acidic bog peats of Eriophorum and Sphagnum (Moore, 1973). Climatic deterioration was the main influence on peat formation but was greatly facilitated by Man 's activities.
People preferred well-drained soils developed from glacial deposits, though finer-textured soils were not avoided (Grimes, 1945). In southern England, people avoided parent materials and soils sandy and poor in bases (Dimbleby,1962). In south Wales, settlements occurred on loams and clay loams overlying limestone (Bridges, 1978).
Pollen analysis and tree stumps and timbers and archaeological sites beneath peat show soil deterioration with Man 's activity. Neolithic Man 's effects were considerable. On freely drained siliceous parent materials, acidification took place fast, rapidly followed by podzolisation. In western Britain, wetter conditions increased organic mat overlying many acid and poorly drained soils. Extensive areas of land  300m in Wales and northern England and Scotland are now treeless moors - in uplands, soils frequently poorly drained with peat, stagnohumic gley soils and stagnopodzols.
Fossil soils beneath the Bronze Age barrows on moorlands, which often suggest former presence of brown earths in a zone now dominated by podzols (Simmons, 1996).
Extensive soil erosion due to ploughed soils resulted in massive alluviation of valleys. Channel infills of the Thames Valley gravel Terraces (deposition) contrast against extensive terrace gravels (Briggs et al., 1985). Channels of the Floodplain Terrace were infilled with silts, peats and marls. Good vegetation cover with woodland along streamside and open areas of grassland on surrounding hills. This shows evidence of deforestation and abundant grazers, preventing tree regeneration.
Calcareous soils, clay soils, gravels - gave rise to pastures and a mix of habitats. Hay meadows and heathland were new habitats created by Man, which contained many unique species such as tall grasses, vetches, Rhinanthus minor. Grazing land contained much Plantago lanceolata. Hay meadows were grown especially on the rich alluvium soils of the valleys, soils which had accumulated by soil erosion from forest clearance on the higher slopes and plateaux for cultivation and animal husbandry, such as the chalklands of the Chilterns, Berkshire. The lighter sand on the plateaux eroded and lined the valley floors as alluvium.
Agricultural revolution happened at the Neolithic/Bronze Age border (Yates, 2001) where new landscape with distinct boundaries occurred, and agriculture and domestication became more sophisticated and intense. Such activity took place on the west of London gravel terraces that lie on edge of Lower Thames Valley in an extensive area of ~150km 2 bounded by rivers Thames, Colne and Crane. By impressive level of river metal deposition, communities here also exploited the largest zone of lower terrace gravel. Pressure on available land intense. Preferred prime land is represented by main gravel terrace, but also land divisions spill over into flood plain gravels, brickearths and gravel islands within alluvial floodplain of river Colne. Here, largest intensive cluster of Middle BA co-axial field divisions for entire Thames Valley and lands fringing estuary in Kent and Essex. Established relationship between metal deposits, new forms of settlement and managed agricultural land. Livestock management appears to be a priority; bounded landscapes focused on main river and its tributaries or direct access to estuary.
Climate was cooler and wetter, and the sea level fell a little. Sphagnum growth was prolific under the cooler and wetter climate, leading to development of many blanket peats (known in soil profiles as the "Grenz Horizant" 1,800-1,500 BP).
A period of cold during the Bronze Age saw that largely all settlements in the uplands in Britain were abandoned. Massive forest clearance occurred in the lowlands. Decrease in Tilia most probably due to humans than climate (Simmons, 1969). Clearances in Dartmoor show more or less continuous presence of indicator species (Simmons, 1964). Great deal of woodland clearance.
There was a major immigration of Celtic people from central Europe to Britain, and brought with them new ideas (including knowledge of iron smelting), crops (including oats which prefer cooler and poorer soils) and animals. The alluviated valleys resulting from soil erosion provided highly productive soils to grow crops.
During this period, Britain began extracting Cu and Sn and smelting Bronze. Tin production occurred especially in Cornwall and people inhabited this area more. Although Britain traded bronze with Europe, use of the landscape was really a continuation from the Stone Age.
Copper mining and prospecting was widely undertaken 1900-1500 BC (Early BA) within certain areas of England and Wales. Evidence for copper mining in Britain is mainly in mid-Wales (two sites in England, at Alderly Edge and Ecton in north Staffordshire) (Timberlake, 2001). Amount of deforestation taking place post-2000 BC suggests increased agriculture exploited local landscape and movement of new peoples into the area (Caseldine, 1990). Mining activity often appears to have occurred on very margins of highest land at or below 400m OD, wide marginal zone between ritual landscape dominated by burial cairns of the Plynlimon plateau and the afforested or cultivated and agriculturally rich valley bottoms and coastal lowlands.
Mining stopped in Britain due to several factors ~1500 BC at end of Early BA. Access to new and more abundant supplies of copper from elsewhere may have coincided with exhaustion of the richer surface-worked or easily accessible deposits as well as increasing problems with drainage at mines. Also movement of people out of the uplands, and climatic deterioration resulting in higher precipitation, and encroachment of peat bog., such as for Copa Hill (Cwmystwyth) (Timberlake, 2001). Surrounding landscape became progressively wetter as grassland took over, then blanket bog developed above the mine following peat initiation 1700-1500 BC. Historic and Prehistoric Mining on Copa Hill. Contributing to environmental decline was deforestation and consumption of large amounts of wood used in fire-setting.
Settlements being established at fixed points and maintained over a period of time. Landscape was being divided up by boundaries - degree of social organisation involving agreement and participation. People trading metals and other materials. Long term changes in socio-economic development driven by control of the land and its agrarian product (Cunliffe, 1995). Settlement in valleys becoming increasingly permanent in upstream areas through time according to economic pressures brought on them (Field, 2001), this view reinforced by long barrows alongside rivers. The best drained soils and possibly the most fertile were cleared very early on (~2,400 BP) (Bartley et al., 1976). With greater investment in land, places became static - less need and desire to move distances.
Occupation continued from the Neolithic into the Bronze Age on lighter soils, but increased settlement on finer-textured soils (Bridges, 1978). Settlements occurred associated with strongly acid, podzolised soils. In south Wales, settlements occurred on loams and clay loams overlying limestone.
In the north Yorkshire Moors, settlements were generally related to the proximity of Magnesian Limestone and well drained sands and gravels (Bartley et al., 1976). From 3,660 BP (Middle BA) at Bishop Middleham, there was massive clearance of forest and spread of pasturing, when cereal cultivation introduced.
Coppice woods were heavily used, particularly for the construction of buildings and trackways.
In upland areas during later Bronze Age, people cleared stone from soil in order to improve the land for cultivation and pasture (Johnston, 2001). Stone was used to build cairns and field banks.
Bronze Age onwards - poor areas, plateau gravel soils and sands - podzols developed. Pastures switched to heathland. Open heaths of the Poole basin in Dorset began to develop in the Bronze Age ~1650 BC (Farrell, 1993) due to agriculture and grazing.
Heathland increased with woodland clearance, grazing and possibly a change in climate until 1000 BC (Haskins, 1978). Heathland vegetation was present on the Lizard, Cornwall during Bronze and Iron Ages. In south Wales, soils beneath extensive oak wood gradually leached until acid brown soils or brown podzolic soils developed (Crompton, 1970).
The chalk downlands of Wessex were maintained as open landscape at least by pastoralism (Field, 2001). Fields were laid out in extensive 'Celtic' coaxial systems. Such layout demanded cooperative agreement and control. Sand of New Forest or nearby clays of London Basin were inherently worse for production than the marginal chalkland of Wessex, but fields were enhanced and emphasised by intensive agricultural use.
Underlying geology of Gog Magog Hills area, Cambridge, is predominantly chalk interspersed with chalky drift. Molluscan evidence revealed open grassland predominant in local area (Hinman, 2001).
Pollen diagram indicates predominantly open heath-type environment probably maintained by grazing existed on Oversley Farm in the Bollin Valley Area (marks boundary between flat, low-lying Cheshire Plain to south and west, and the foothills of Pennines to the north and east) (Garner, 2001), on isolated patches of glacial sands and gravels that overlie the boulder clays of the area.
The landscape was virtually missing forest, more open than the landscape of the present day.
Agriculture and British life was somewhat revolutionised during the Iron Age by the Iron Plough, which allowed heavier soils to be exploited. People also started to fertilise fields with dung. The Iron Age is very visible in the pollen by new crops, weeds and animals.
The most extensive and complete forest clearance recorded in the pollen record occurred across Britain during the Iron Age. It caused much inwashing of soil into river channels. The landscape was organised and planned, and there was removal of virtually all woodland in the pollen catchment.
Decrease in oakwoods began during the Iron Age as climate was wetter and cooler. Regeneration was inhibited by Man grazing animals (Crompton, 1970). The pollen record shows an increase in Polypodium, an indicator species of open spaces. Accelerated fluvial activity was common in Britain. Narrow terracing appears to have been constructed in an attempt to conserve hillside tilth from soil erosion.
In Dartmoor and other upland areas, most settlement was on lower ground as people moved out of the hills (Simmons, 1964). Clearance intensified in lands marginal to moorland. Blanket bog covered most of land  487m. Further deforestation happened under influence of the tinners (miners), and introduction of high sheep densities by local monasteries, presence of rabbits (encouraged). Deer and ponies, and practice of common rights (e.g. taking timber and burning of moor) have all led to the treeless landscape of today.
Occupation expanded on to areas with the more difficult secondary soils resulting from earlier clearance and exploitation such as coarse-textured podzols (Bridges, 1978). At this time, people were cultivating alluvium soils, as in Anglesey (Grimes, 1945). Thorpe Bulmer in the north Yorkshire Moors had intensive cultivation of hemp (Cannabis pollen) and some cereals at 2,064 BP (Bartley et al., 1976).
There was soil instability in the Bowmont Valley of the Cheviot Hills, Scotland (Mercer & Tipping, 1994). Above alluvium of the Bowmont Water drainage network are poorly drained non-calcareous gleys of the Atton Series on lowermost slopes, clayey till and solidifluction sheets. Above these on moderate to steep slopes are Sourhope series soils, freely drained brown forest soils. Near-total woodland clearance at Sourhope deep in Bowmont Valley slightly later in age at   50 BC. Freely-drained peaty podzols of Cowie Series occur on extensive gentle plateau surfaces at intermediate altitudes (350-450m OD). On very steep slopes above and below these plateaux are skeletal soil complexes. In Bowmont Valley and other places in southern Scotland and northern England. Settlement intensified during and after the mid-third century BC as the human population expanded.
In general, the most extensive vegetation across Britain was grassland, from base-rich Agrostis-Festuca communities to acid and waterlogged Nardus stands (King, 1962). Calluna heath was common on less intensively grazed areas (King, 1960; Hunter, 1962).
Man lived in a predominantly forested British landscape. Scattered evidence exists for human activity in this period. Man relied on hunting animals and occupied caves. It seems Man had little effect on the soils, as there was minimal alteration of vegetation.
Man developed a more sophisticated subsistence strategy under improved climatic conditions. Along with hunting, protodomestication appeared in the form of keeping livestock and the occasional growing of cereals. People continued to use natural woodland clearings but started to create them as well. The landscape would have still been mainly wooded but with sporadic clearings across it.
In the uplands, nearly all terrain was covered with mixed oak forest, broken by open water and mires in water-receiving sites. However, Man 's activities during this time did initiate peat formation, the origins of today 's moorland landscapes (Simmons, 1996). Blanket peat bogs (Sphagnum) form when persistent waterlogging and poor aeration inhibit mineralisation and decomposed plant remains accumulate (Avery, 1990).
Man 's first major impacts on the landscape and soils began during the Neolithic. Primitive pastoralist societies modified soil development by altering the vegetation by burning and grazing and causing erosion. Protodomestication developed into a more sophisticated and intensive agriculture, mainly driven by climatic deterioration, which started to have real impact towards the late Neolithic/Bronze Age border.
Forest clearance occurred on a much larger scale to create fields to pen livestock and for cultivation, exposing soils to weathering. Deforestation exposes soils to weathering and enhances leaching of soils. Continued weathering and leaching tends to impoverish the upper soil by removal of basic cations (Avery, 1990). From this time onwards, leaching and erosion of soil was severe, causing major alluviation of valleys.
Moorlands replaced forests, especially in the north and west of England. Original forest soils with low production potential (rendzinas, brown calcareous earths, brown soils and gley soils) were converted to agricultural earths capable of crop production (Bridges, 1978). In uncultivated areas, various grassland and heath communities replaced forest according to local climatic and soil conditions and incidence of grazing. Grasses and weeds flourished in grasslands kept open by deforestation, fire and grazing.
Acidification of soils by leaching would have occurred especially in upland areas, although the parent bedrock does have a large influence on upper soil horizons, e.g. chalk grasslands of the Wessex and South Downs remain neutral/basic pH. Burning also increases nutrient loss due to mineralization and increased solubility of elements in drainage waters, leading to increased acidity of soil, lower N and poorer forest growth.
When coarse textured soils are cleared of woodland and acidify by severe leaching, podzolisation follows. This process happened under high rainfall on the top plateaux of valleys, and heathland developed by colonisation of Ericaceous species. Ericales expanded at the end of the Neolithic/start of the Bronze Age.
Much gleying of finer-textured soils also occurred. Loss in forest vegetation and removal of crops lowered soil structural stability and caused compaction and poor drainage. Gleying happens in soils where drainage is restricted, and leaching is hindered. In stagnated water in the soil, microorganisms and plants use dissolved oxygen faster than that replaced by diffusion leading to anaerobic conditions where ferric ions are readily reduced to ferrous state. Gleying gives rise to subsurface horizons with greyish, greenish or bluish colours contrasting with those of weathered horizons.
Revolutionised agriculture allowed tougher soils to be exploited. Almost all of the remaining woodland was cleared and widespread 'Celtic' field systems and lynchetts were heavily ploughed over time. Serious soil erosion off the valley hills continued. Sheep densities significantly increased, particularly in the uplands due to open grazing areas available on blanket peat.
The cooler and wetter climate increased podzolisation of soils, and by the end of the Iron Age many of the coarse-grained soils were podzols. Bronze Age brown soils had also become podzols by Roman times (Crompton, 1970).
From the Neolithic to the Iron Age, a span of ~4000 years, clearances greatly extended and introduction of tillage was based initially on use of hand implements. Weeds were prevalent across widely distributed prehistoric 'Celtic fields'. There is evidence of lynchetts (cultivation terraces) and other ploughing artefacts, occurrence of settlements in valleys of contemporary alluvial and colluvial deposits apparently reflecting increased soil erosion on slopes above (Avery, 1990).
Virgin landscapes, variations in vegetation and associated organisms generally accord with variations in climate and parent material. However, over Prehistory, the development and sophistication of Man and his agricultural techniques completely changed the British landscape. What was a more or less blanket cover of woodland in the Palaeolithic was converted to an open land of pastures, moorlands, heathlands and grasslands, with very little remaining tree cover by the end of the Iron Age.
The dramatic change in vegetation communities across Britain was mainly due to Man 's impacts on the soils through deforestation and agriculture. The main processes of soil modification have been leaching, gleying and podzolisation, nictitated by interruption of the natural bio-geochemical dynamics of the soil causing leaching and soil erosion.
It seems predominantly brown earths under woodland (acid or calcareous according to the subsoil) were modified and new types created including blanket peat bogs, gleyed soils and podzolised soils. Though the range of soil types is largely influenced by the subsoil types, it is Man 's activities that have driven the changes. As a result, alongside man-made cultivated land, new 'natural' habitats have arisen supporting various communities, including moorlands, heathlands and grasslands. Many of these are plagioclimatic communities, where vegetation succession has been deviated away from its natural path by an outside force, usually deforestation, burning or grazing. The soils underneath moorlands have largely been irreversibly changed, and are too acidic to allow regeneration of the former mixed forests.
Should Man have not had such influence on the land, the landscape now would probably have remained as closed woodland, with surviving alpine communities on limestone pavements and other such natural open habitats, with predominantly brown earth soils to the present day. Man 's activity since Palaeolithic times has meant we enjoy a wider range of landscapes, habitats and communities in Britain. It is important that we continue to preserve the diversity our ancestors helped to create.
