Elasticity is a measure of responsiveness. The price elasticity of demand is a measure of the responsiveness of the quantity demanded of a good to a change in its price.
One way to measure responsiveness is by using the slope of demand curve (Slope = change in y-axis / change in x-axis). We want to know the change in quantity that results from a   1 change in price. As slope of demand curve is always negative, we are commonly interested in the inverse of the slope. However, there are problems by using slope to measure responsiveness. We cannot compare two demand curves simply by their slopes because the slope of a demand curve depends in the nits in which we measure the price and quantity. We also need to compare the demand curves for various goods but different goods have different units. On the other hand, prices vary greatly. A   1 change in the price of an expensive good produce a small response but   1 change in the price of a cheap good produce a large response. As a result, we have to use another way to measure responsiveness and elasticity is that measure.
Price elasticity of demand (  ) is a units-free measure and is a measure of responsiveness which can be compared across goods.
The formula means the percentage change in quantity that takes place when price changes by one percent. The price elasticity of demand tells us how responsive or elastic the demand is. The price elasticity is a negative number as a decrease in quantity demand results in an increase in price. To compare elasticities, we can use the magnitude of the price elasticity of demand and ignore the minus sign.
We have to collect information on the amount of different types of food sold at different prices (e.g. before and after sale) before we calculate the elasticity. To calculate the elasticity of demand, we express the changes in price and quantity demanded as percentages of the average price and the average quantity. By using the average price and average quantity, we calculate the elasticity at a point on the demand curve midway between the original point and the new point. This method is called arc elasticity. It is an average over a range of price and gives an estimate of the price elasticity of demand between two points on the demand curve. Another more usual way to calculate elasticity is called point elasticity. Instead of using a mean value, we use the value at a point. These two methods are used to calculate elasticity with a linear demand curve.
There are different types of elasticity along a linear demand curve:
If the quantity demanded remains constant when the price changes, then the elasticity of demand is zero and demand is said to be perfectly inelasticity.
If the percentage change in the quantity demanded is less than the percentage change in price, then the magnitude of the elasticity of demand is between zero and one and demand is said to be inelastic.
If the percentage change in the quantity demanded equals the percentage change in price, then the elasticity of demand equals to one and is said to be unit elastic.
If the percentage change in the quantity demanded exceeds the percentage change in price, then the magnitude of the elasticity of demand is greater than one and demand is said to be elastic.
If the quantity demanded is infinitely responsive to a price change, then the magnitude of the elasticity of demand is infinity and demand is said to be infinitely elastic. For example, in a very competitive market, a small change in price will lead to a big change in quantity sold.
We can calculate the income elasticity of demand (  i) to determine whether the food is a kind of normal or inferior good.
If the food is a normal good, its demand will increase when income increases despite the rise in price. If the food is an inferior good, its demand will decrease when income increase no matter the price falls or rises.
Many kinds of food are related to each other. The cross price elasticity of demand (  xy) tells us the effect on the quantity demanded of one good when the price of another good is changed.
If   xy   0, the food are substitutes in consumption. If   xy   0, the food are complements in consumption. Both the income elasticity of demand and cross price elasticity of demand are important to adjust the amount of supply.
It is important to know the responsiveness of food demand because it is closely related to total revenue as it depends on the extent to which the quantity sold changes as the price changes. Total revenue(TR) from the sale of a good equals the price(P) of the good multiplied by quantity(Q) sold (TR = P    Q). An increase in price has two opposing effects on total revenue. It increases the revenue on each unit sold but at the same time leads to a decrease in the quantity sold which decreases revenue. Either of these two opposing effects could be the larger. Total revenue increases as price increases if the good has a more inelastic demand (0  1). Total revenue unchanged as price increases if the good has a unit elastic demand (elasticity = 1).
Most owners want to maximize their profit. A supermarket cannot continue to operate if it does not make any profit and so it is essential to know how to increase the total revenue.
Sometimes we also need to adjust the prices to obtain equilibrium (i.e. the quantities demanded equal to the quantities supplied). Otherwise excess demand or excess supply occurs and leads to a waste of resources and decrease in revenue.
The more elastic the demand, the closer the substitutes available, the higher the income spent on food and the greater the time lapse since a price change. Thus when we know the elasticity of demand, we can find out the major reasons that influence the elasticity of food demand and can decide whether we should increase or decrease certain food supply.
