In approaching this question I shall be focusing on the issue of instruction and I feel that this is a particularly central issue with regards my experience of learning Persian. This was not an ideal learning experience, and I shall examine what instruction was missing from it and what instruction would have helped to make it more successful. I shall examine therefore, how instruction affected my learning experience. There are several different methods of instruction, all of which focus on a particular area of language learning theory and suggest particular methods of teaching, some more controversial than others. By focusing on instruction, I will be looking at what I was getting from the environment, that is to say, from the Persian coursebook and tape. Hence, my aim here is to conclude which language learning theory (or theories) the Persian coursebook and tape is most closely focused on, the limitations and benefits of these theories and what would have enhanced my learning experience.
I will examine here the type of instruction received. A fuller analysis of the coursebook can be found in appendix 1.
The introductory section was a section which relied almost solely on the cassette and involved listening to and repeating words in order to get used to hearing and pronouncing Persian sounds. This was an important section as my aim was to learn how to speak and listen to Persian, but not to write the Persian script. However, there was no supporting visual aid to this section, which meant that while I was able to repeat the sounds that I was hearing, I did not know what the corresponding written form of the sound was. It was a lengthy exercise, with long periods of sitting and listening but no active participation on my part. Knowing what words I was pronouncing would have added meaning to the task and would have been a good introduction to some basic Persian vocabulary which could have then been more formally introduced in the initial sections. Therefore, when it came to continuing with the course, I did not have a useful model of pronunciation to listen to on which to base words I was coming across in sections 1 to 6.
It was not just pronunciation difficulties which arose. Lessons tended to jump into dialogues and straight back out again. These dialogues were relied upon to create some contextual embedding but perhaps a more detailed introduction to the topic area would have prepared me more for the dialogue. What I was learning were isolated decontextualised pieces of language and I found the exercises where I had to construct new sentences (for example exercise 2 of lesson 5 in Rafiee 2005: 66) very hard. This is because I only felt that I had learnt complete structures and I did not know how to break these structures down in order to create new sentences. More instruction might have better prepared me for these types of exercises.
One of my biggest failings was memory. Whilst learning is down to me (i.e. nobody can do the learning for me), instruction would have made my task easier. I found that in a lot of the exercises where the student has to practice the forms and vocabulary presented, new vocabulary was expected to be used. As I was not yet comfortable with the original forms and vocabulary, the introduction of new vocabulary in the practice exercises was stressful. A greater number of exercises which practised solely forms and vocabulary already met would have been beneficial, especially as items were generally only presented once and it appears to have been assumed that if an item had been presented, it had been understood and learnt. Finally, and most importantly, feedback was only supplied in the three additional micro-teaching sessions. More feedback would have led to correction of pronunciation, a review of my performance and would have allowed me to check my grammar comprehension.
According to Spolsky (1990: 2), 'any theory of second language learning that leads to a single method is obviously wrong' and methods which support a single theory can only be correct 'with certain interpretations under certain conditions' (1990: 4). Spolsky therefore devised a general theory of second language learning comprising six necessary conditions which a learner needs to be able to learn a L2. I will focus on these six conditions when assessing what was missing from my language learning experience. They are as follows:
Analysis: Learners need to be able to break down and analyse a language.
Recombination: Learners must be able to take elements learnt and put them together in different ways. This is more difficult for beginners, particularly in informal situations.
Contextualembedding: Learners need to see how things work in a context and how items learnt fit into a bigger picture. Isolated pieces of grammar and vocabulary are not very beneficial to the learner.
Matching: Learners need to match what they are producing against some kind of target, such as a native speaker. This allows them to hear discrepancies and overcome differences in production.
Memory: The ability to retain things is an important part of learning a language.
Practice: Repeated output is needed in order to achieve a certain level of fluency. (Spolsky 1990).
Of course, some things are more difficult to teach, such as accent and intonation, but all of the above conditions can be enhanced through formal (classroom) or informal (natural) instruction. In a natural learning environment, the conditions of matching, recombination and contextual embedding will dominate (Spolsky 1990). In a classroom environment, these conditions will be present, but not so predominantly, because there will be less native speakers (usually only the teacher), limited recombination as the teacher chooses the focus, and contextual embedding will usually have to be imagined in tasks (Spolsky 1990). However, in formal instruction the condition of analysis dominates as there is often some focus on form, even in communicative approaches.
Using Spolsky 's general theory of language learning it is possible to see what aspects were missing from my experience of learning Persian Whilst there was an attempt at analysis in the coursebook, Spolsky 's first necessary condition, there was a tendency for whole structures to be taught, with some analysis but no complete breakdown of structures. This made recombination difficult, stressful and frustrating. Hence, Spolsky 's second condition could not be fully met. Greater thought was needed to contextualise the material, and so the third condition was not fully met either. I have also already made mention of the pronunciation difficulties which arose and whilst the cassette was used for the dialogues, it was not used extensively, especially when other new vocabulary was introduced. As a beginner, greater use of the cassette in the course would have given a target to focus on and Spolsky 's fourth condition of matching would have been more fully met. Finally, as already suggested, there were not enough exercises focusing on the practice of new forms and so I was not confident in using them or new vocabulary. A greater focus on this condition (number six), perhaps making use of the cassette, would have also helped with Spolsky 's fifth condition of memory. So whilst the coursebook does show elements of Spolsky 's six necessary conditions, it does not meet them fully and therefore there were limitations in the success of the instruction received.
The Persian coursebook is not based on Spolsky 's general theory, but is most likely closely linked to ideas of instruction based on one (or more) theories of second language learning. Form-focused instruction refers to 'any planned or incidental instructional activity that is intended to induce language learners to pay attention to linguistic form' (Ellis 2001:1-2). Having examined a general theory of what is necessary in order to learn a L2, I will now examine three principal types of form-focused instruction, and an example of second language teaching theory relevant to each type.
In this method, structures, words and grammatical rules are broken down and taught to the learner. With the help of teaching materials and the teacher, the learner then puts these parts back together again (Long and Robinson 1998). Teaching follows a more traditional approach and the language is studied as an object, the aim of a lesson being to acquire a particular form, preselected by the teacher (Ellis 2001). An example of teaching which follows this type of teaching is the Grammar Translation (GT) method, where the aim of teaching is to illustrate a grammatical point (Johnson 2001). However, here I will examine the theory of cognitive code which can be described as a modern day approach to the GT method (Carroll 1966).
Cognitive Code relies on task-based teaching. A grammatical form is explicitly taught, what Johnson calls declarativization, where the teacher explains how  'some aspect of language "works"' (Johnson 2001: 195). This is the presentation stage. The next stage is proceduralization, whereby the new rule is practiced (in for example, gap filling and memory exercises) by at first giving it 100% concentration and then slowly introducing other items until the rule is no longer directly focused on in tasks, and the learner is able to produce it with ease, otherwise known as progressive form defocus (or ra - 1, where ra = required attention) (Johnson 1996: 139). This progressive automatization is especially important so that items are not proceduralized incorrectly. It is for this reason that Johnson (1996) highlights that both stages are necessary in the DECPRO model, that is to say the process of going from declarative knowledge (knowing about the language) to procedural knowledge (being able to use the language). This model for learning is therefore very similar to Palmer 's PPP model of Presentation (declarativization), Practice (proceduralization) and Production (proceduralization by progressive form defocus) (Johnson 1996). The traditional Grammar Translation method was strong on Presentation and controlled Practice, but there was little Production, and so items were not produced automatically.
Task-based teaching often only focuses on the proceduralization stage, but declarative knowledge is vital too and Johnson (1996) stresses the importance of a learning model which includes both. This is because fluency depends on procedural learning, whereby the learner stores information in their working memory in order to concentrate their efforts on 'comprehending and conveying meanings clearly' (Johnson 1996: 89). However, in order to work through hesitations, the learner is relying on declarative knowledge, held in their long term memory. Successful instruction must therefore take into account this learning theory.
Often, DECPRO learning can lead to declarative knowledge disappearing. For example a person might only be able to remember a telephone number by actually dialling the number, a type of habit formation consistent with behaviourist theory. However, when a learner encounters a new verb, they still need to be able to rely on declarative knowledge in order to be able to conjugate it. It is therefore necessary to 'develop teaching strategies for maintaining declarative representations when they are in danger of disappearing' (Johnson 1996: 97). This is because 'if exercises to help embed declarative knowledge in the mind are rushed, declarative knowledge cannot be developed' (Dekeyser 1998: 58).
In the DECPRO model, the learner must be consciously aware of rules for proceduralization to take place. Instruction is therefore important but explanations should not be too long, as they can prove complicated for the learner and can get in the way of acquisition and 'hinder performance' (Johnson 2001: 238). A way around this might be to simplify rules initially in order to allow for DECPRO, and then introduce more complexity at a later stage. Declarative knowledge should be practiced and developed in order to lead to proceduralization and this production stage is difficult to achieve in the instruction environment (Dekeyser 1998). It is necessary for the learner to practise their production in the real world (Ellis, 1990) and for classroom input to be meaningful (Carroll 1966).
In focus on form, new rules are still seen to benefit from instruction. However, this type of instruction contrasts with focus on forms because it is not pre-planned but is 'learner-initiated' (Long and Robinson 1998: 40) whereby any focus on linguistic items occurs as they arise in the class and the learner 'focuses on form by comparing their output with the input' (Long and Robinson 1998: 23). The aim is to enhance communicative based input in order to increase salience so that certain forms stand out to the learner, known as the noticing hypothesis as put forward by Schmidt (1990, 1994, 1995a in Ellis 2001). The learning theory behind this method, based on general cognitive theory, is that 'acquisition occurs as a result of frequent exposure to a target feature' (Ellis 2001: 21). In instruction therefore, tasks are similar to communicative tasks, but they are more focused so as to concentrate implicitly on a particular form. Focus on form can also be more explicit. A communicative task can be set and then focus on form occurs when student or teacher has noticed a problem or potential problem (Ellis 2001).
Focus on form instruction is at the centre of the noticing hypothesis (Ellis 2001). Learners do not learn rules, as in focus on forms instruction, but are exposed to raw data, which contains examples of the rules. Thus, language is an object which is used to 'fill-out, tune or reset an already existing set of linguistic principles and parameters' (Sharwood Smith 1993: 170). The difference between 'acquiring knowledge and acquiring control' (Sharwood Smith 1993: 169) is noted, whereby a learner acquires new vocabulary and rules (knowledge) but will not immediately have the control to be able to use this knowledge fluently. Proficiency will come as the learner acquires greater control through input enhanced instruction (Tonkyn 2005). There are two types of input enhancement: positive input enhancement makes the correct forms salient and negative input enhancement highlights incorrect output produced by the learner (Sharwood Smith 1993). Teachers can either give the correct form, or highlight the incorrect form. For instance, teachers can flag errors in their feedback, often through stress or intonation, allowing the learner to self-correct.
With focus on form instruction, acquisition cannot be assumed. Input from instruction 'may or may not be registered' (Sharwood Smith 1993: 167) and therefore the learner may still not produce the correct output. This is because when processing input, learners either take note of meaning (short term memory) or form (long-term memory). Teachers must be aware of the difference between input (what the learner is exposed to), and intake, which is what is actually taken in by the learner (Sharwood Smith 1993). Just because a form has been made salient does not mean that the learner has either noticed it, or, if they have noticed it, acquired it. They may be able to use a particular form in ideal conditions, but this is different from using it in the real world (Johnson 1996). For this reason, it is important to start with rules in their simplest forms and bring in more complex parts as simpler rules are mastered (Tonkyn 2005).
In focus on meaning instruction, the L2 is learnt incidentally, much like in L1 learning. Languages are treated not 'as an object of study' but as 'a medium of communication' (Long and Robinson 1998: 18). Unlike focus on forms and focus on form instruction, input is not modified in advance, but instead the internal, natural syllabus of the learner is relied upon. Acquisition is therefore unconscious as learners 'attend only to the content of what they want to communicate' (Ellis 2001: 13).
Krashen 's Monitor theory (appendix 2) views instruction as a source of comprehensible input a little beyond the level of the learner, particularly beginners, with little or no formal grammar instruction (Chaudron 1988). Krashen and Terrell 's Natural Approach and Asher 's Total Physical Response Method (TPR) are two methods of meaning focused instruction based on this learning theory. Both methods are based on the idea that formal grammar instruction is a fairly recent phenomenon and that there are in fact very few 'learnable rules' (Ellis 1994: 614). Formal instruction therefore has a limited place in these methods, and learners should favour comprehensible input from the real world over instruction.
Both Asher and Terrell 's methods rely heavily on comprehensible input as the main form of instruction and the primary focus is not on form, but meaning. In the first stages of Asher 's TPR method the learner receives comprehensible input through the aid of physical activity but is not expected to speak. L2 acquisition is treated in the same way as L1 acquisition and learners are initially only expected to physically respond to commands (Richards and Rodgers 2001). When the learner is ready, they will produce output, in the form of one-word utterances. Finally, and again only when ready, the learner produces short phrases until they are at the stage to benefit from real world input (Krashen 1985). The belief is that the language classroom 'cannot provide all acquirers with the specific kinds of input they need to function in the outside world' (Krashen 1985: 71).
Terrell 's Natural Approach follows a similar pattern. Skills are acquired in the order of listening, speaking, reading and writing, much as they would be acquired in the L1 and to do this the teacher provides comprehensible input in the L2 (Krashen and Terrell 1983). The level of response expected from the student is gradually raised (responses are not expected to be verbal in the very early stages). As the goal is communicative, the syllabus is organised by topic, not grammatical structures based on the theory that 'if goals are grammatical, some grammar will be learned and very little acquired' (Krashen and Terrell 1983: 21). That is not to say that grammar does not have a place, but conscious learning of the rules is considered to be of little benefit to the learner (Chaudron 1988).
Meaning-focused instruction is not well suited to older learners as they do not have the same ability to learn a second language through exposure alone as they did when they first acquired their L1. They are therefore able to become fluent but will struggle to become native-like (Long and Robinson 1998). In fact, both adults and children can struggle and often would benefit from increased salience, especially in the area of grammar. This is because if communication has been successful, errors in grammar are not corrected (Krashen and Terrell 1983) but there is then a risk of fossilisation and even after real-world exposure, learners may continue to make the same errors. Meaning-focused communicative approaches cannot therefore easily lead to native speaker proficiency (Richards and Rodgers 2001).
As a result of this examination of three types of instruction, each based on a different theory of language learning, I can now view my Persian learning in a more informed light. On the surface it appears to focus on meaning because it is organised by topic and aims to teach colloquial Persian, including culture, with little focus on the written language. However, in the focus on meaning method of instruction, emphasis is on comprehensible input, which was not the main method of the coursebook. The dialogues in each lesson were a way of introducing new raw data for the learner, and so in this way, one might conclude that instruction focuses on form. However, in the coursebook, instruction of forms is pre-planned, suggesting a focus on forms approach to teaching. So, upon closer analysis it becomes clear that generally speaking, the coursebook used focuses on forms.
Each lesson has a clear grammatical item or structure as its central core and some of the exercises used are similar to those highlighted by Johnson (1996) such as fill in the gap exercises. However, Johnson 's method stresses the importance of a balance between declarative knowledge, prominent in the coursebook, and procedural knowledge, which is the coursebook 's weak point. There is little attempt at progressive form defocus in the exercises enabling confident use of structures. This lack of emphasis on proceduralization is, I believe, the course 's biggest failing. Had exercises been less rushed, declarative knowledge would have been developed and new information activated. More time spent practising would have led to forms being proceduralised and the inclusion of production, perhaps by making greater use of the cassette, would have enhanced the learning experience. The micro-session with the Persian native speaker was extremely helpful for this exact reason, as it prepared students for real world communication, and because it allowed learners to match their production against a native speaker, which is Spolsky 's fourth necessary condition for successful second language learning. The micro-teaching sessions also acted as revision sessions, which stopped each lesson from becoming an isolated unit of work.
A strong point of the course is that it does not allow declarative knowledge to disappear, a point which Johnson (1996) stresses to be important. Exercises introduce new verbs and vocabulary so students have to draw on declarative knowledge in order to complete the exercises. However, theses types of exercises should come after a greater number of practice exercises, in order for some proceduralization to have taken place. Similarly, paradigms and structures should be broken down and analysed in greater depth in order for the student to be able to call on their declarative knowledge when asked to do exercises which ask them to recombine knowledge and form new sentences. Spolsky (1990) also emphasised the importance of analysis and recombination in successful language learning.
Whilst Rafiee (2005) does explicitly present the grammar, it is not explicitly taught through the exercises and cassette tape. Greater focus on practice, important for successful language learning according to Spolsky (1990), and production using the available materials (especially the cassette) would also have improved the success of the course and led to improved automatisation according to Johnson (1996). In the focus on meaning approach, presentation of a rule is enough and there is no need for it to be explicitly taught, but here, instruction focuses on forms and presentation is not sufficient. The aim of this course is to communicate successfully in Persian, but there is in fact very little practice at communicating and pronunciation errors may fossilise.
Many questions remain to be asked about the issue of instruction in second language teaching, which I have not addressed here. Studies investigating whether or not instruction can alter the course of second language acquisition, the effect of instruction on second language acquisition (see Harley 1988 for a more detailed discussion) and whether instruction can make a difference (see Long 1983) have often concluded that instruction is beneficial. Similarly, research into what types of instruction are the most beneficial is still ongoing. However, more research is needed in this broad area in order to really reach a conclusion about the benefits or otherwise of formal instruction and answering these questions is not the aim here.
The type of instruction received in the Persian coursebook had its limitations, and by relating this to theories, this explains the difficulties faced in my language learning experience. The instruction in my learning experience focuses largely on a focus on forms method, but also in part focuses on meaning because the overall aim of the course is verbal communication in colloquial Persian. Whilst Spolsky (1990) writes that a theory should not focus on one method, I think that as a beginner learning Persian, the hardest thing was that lessons appeared to focus on two methods: focus on meaning and focus on forms. Concentrating on two very different methods makes it difficult for a learner to concentrate both on meaning and on forms, particularly when learning a language so very different from any they have met before. Difficulties also arose because of the emphasis on declarative knowledge and the neglect at transforming this knowledge into procedural knowledge. Explicit focus on forms which is declarative biased does not lead to acquisition according to Johnson 's DECPRO model (1996) and based on my Persian language learning experience I would be inclined to agree.
