This essay will first consider what is meant by pattern grammar and look at a brief history behind the concept. It will then consider the statement in the title by referring to principles which have led to a way of investigating language known as corpus linguistics. It will show how this has provided an analytical tool for theorising about patterns and meaning and the importance of this to a description of English. Examples will be used from the Bank of English to evidence the connections.
Pattern grammar can be seen as a description of language which treats lexis and grammar as a single item (Hunston & Francis, 1998). Traditionally these areas have been treated separately but corpus based research has highlighted that patterns may be shown for all words and that where these patterns occur meaning is shared (Hunston et al., 1997).
The concept of pattern grammar may be traced back to Hornby 's A Guide to Patterns and Usage in English first published in 1954 (Hunston & Francis, 2000). In his work Hornby (1954) focussed on usage and as a result reported on patterns of usage rather than on formal structure. His ideas contrasted with those of Chomsky in the 1950s whose theory of a transformational-generative grammar treated lexis and grammar as separate items. Hunston & Francis (2000:7) point out that during the1970s studies of language changed emphasis and work focussed on lexis as the central principle.
More recently the disciplines of lexicography, pedagogy, and psycholinguistics have concerned themselves with research into lexical phrases which has added to the perception of language as phraseological.
A problem for lexicographers when compiling dictionaries has been how to list lexical phrases, particularly idioms, which do not necessarily follow the normal rules of syntax. For example; He stole a march on... not the march was stolen by him or they stole some marches.
The meaning of the idiom cannot be determined by knowledge of meaning of each item. Other lexical phrases not considered idioms present similar problems for listing. Of course and in the main, cannot be broken down into preposition and noun because this does not convey their meaning.
Language teachers have confronted the problem for learners of fluency where knowledge of lexical phrases can make their language sound more natural and allow the learner to concentrate on other areas.
For psycholinguists the interest has been in how users store and retrieve language and their research has suggested that users store language not just as single items but in phrases as well as with syntactic rules allowing for creative use of both (Hunston & Francis, 2000).
It is within this historical background that Sinclair (1991) put forward his theory of 'units of meaning' which illustrates that lexical items need to be viewed in their environment in order to convey meaning.
Corpus linguistics, as the methodology which provided the development of this theory, works on several principles which differ from previous methodologies of language description. These principles are set out by Hunston and Francis (2000:15) as; the data is authentic.
To study how language is used it is necessary to observe language actually used. the data is not selected on linguistic grounds.
When a particular feature of English is chosen for study it is often chosen because it stands out in some way and so is indicative of the unusual not the common usage of language. there is a lot of data.
The larger a corpus is the more detail may be discovered about less frequent items. This principle is based on what Sinclair (1991:100) says about 'the accumulation of patterns of hundreds of individual words and phrases' which are evidenced only by observing large amounts of data. the data is systematically organised.
Data needs to be presented in a way that allows observation while maintaining objectivity as much as is possible where the nature of the system requires categorisation. the data is not annotated in terms of existing theories.
While annotation of corpora may be helpful in searching categories such annotation will necessarily reflect any theory on which it is based.
These principles can now be investigated with Kennedy 's (1998:10) observation in mind; 'The major shift in methodology associated with corpus linguistics comes not from theory but rather from what the use of corpora makes possible.'.
How the use of corpora is made possible then is in the methodology of first finding and then interpreting concordance lines. A concordancer is not a corpus - it is a computer programme used to search a corpus which displays information in different ways for interpretation.
The following shows a randomly selected single word-form search for aim using jLookup concordancing software and the Bank of English Corpus.
The following shows the same concordance lines sorted alphabetically according to the first word to the right of aim.
By displaying the data differently it is possible to begin to see patterns emerging. In the example to and is to and for appear to associate with aim frequently. The same data can also be displayed sorted to the left.
It is now easy to see the frequencies with which the, main, now, and to appear to the left of aim.
It is also possible to search for a phrase which may help to determine patterns within phrases. The following displays 15 lines contained in the result of searching the word string in the (adjective) of making it possible to see which adjectives appear in this sequence and if there is any pattern to their appearance.
In this limited search it seems dead and best appear frequently in this construction.
A further example of using concordancing software to determine patterns is the use of fixed phrases whose use cannot be explained in terms of rules only as patterns.
For example; in the Bank of English the phrase fish and chips appears 82 times but chips and fish never; s hoes and socks appears 23 times but socks and shoes only once; u p and down appears 1025 times and down and up seven.
However, four of those occurrences are in sequences which include up and down and up as shown.
These types of search make it possible to use a word, a lemma (the different forms a word may take such as its base and -s, -ed, and -ing forms), or a phrase as the target. Limiting this type of search is the ability of the human observer to extract information. The lines themselves present information but it is the analyst who must make interpretations and this will require a certain amount of intuition. Hunston (2002) refers to this type of search as 'word-based'.
Sinclair (1991) concentrated on the association of sense and syntax and continued to emphasise this with statements like; '...there is ultimately no distinction between form and meaning' (Sinclair 1991:496), and Francis (1995) developed this toward the idea that '...certain patterns  'select' words of particular meaning' (Hunston & Francis 2000:29), suggesting the application of categories relating to meaning. Hunston (2002) makes a distinction here saying that a word-based approach and a category-based approach answer different questions so must be applied at different times.
The issue being whether to work from a lexical basis to identify patterns, as has been done with the concordance lines above, or from a pattern basis to discover which lexical items share the pattern.
The methodology used in a category-based approach looks beyond the concordance line to frequency lists and to collocation.
Sinclair (2004) describes collocation as the choice of one word being conditioned by the next. By using concordancing software as an analytical tool it is possible to investigate the presence of patterns in those choices.
Frequency word lists show which words occur most often with a target word. For example the eight most frequent collocates of aim using jLookup and the Bank of English are:
Although these frequency figures show the most frequent collocates of aim they do not give information on the significance of these figures. Software allows the analyst to view collocations as a Mutual Information (MI) score, or as a t-score. MI scores are made by calculating the expected occurrence of words based on randomness and comparing that with actual occurrence to provide evidence of the significance of the collocation.
The following list displays the eight most significant collocates of aim based on MI scores and t-scores.
The difference is that the MI score indicates the strength of a collocation and the t-score, by measuring conformity within normal distribution, indicates certainty. Thus, as has been noted above, different methods are used to interpret the same information depending on the questions to be answered.
The corpus evidence presented above serves to highlight how corpus-based descriptions of language have provided important observations into the connection between pattern and meaning.
Having looked at this evidence it may be helpful to consider two principles of language choice available to the English speaker characterised by Sinclair (1991:109).
The first is the open choice principle which allows that the only restriction on choice is grammaticalness. That is; language choice is based on a user 's ability to convey meaning by the application of grammatical rules combined with individual lexical items.
The second principle, the idiom principle, allows for the choice of semi pre-constructed sequences and recognises the tendency of associations in the world around us to be reflected in the same tendencies of association in language. Kennedy (1998:110) examples ice and cold, cry and tears, noise and loud/soft as words which co-occur and may be a reflection of nature. The idiom principle also relates to semi pre-constructed phrases which could be seen as a single choice such as of course or at least.
Sinclair (2004) makes the point that most usage lies somewhere between the two principles with some patterns tending towards open choice and some toward idiomaticity. He further defines these tendencies as 'terminological' (open choice) and 'phraseological' (idiomatic). The first where a word has a fixed meaning and the second where words take their meaning from each other.
Hunston and Francis (2000) demonstrate that lists of words which have a specific pattern tend to fit into groups supplying meaning. They example the pattern verb + of + noun (2000:83) with a list of 32 verbs taken from the Collins COBUILD English Dictionary. Those verbs include; approve, disapprove, despair, repent, boast, complain, speak, talk, tell. Taking just these nine verbs it is possible to see how they may be grouped according to meaning. The last three speak, talk, tell, all mean talk about and the first two mean like or the opposite.
Linking pattern to meaning by division into groups in this way relies heavily on intuition but it does help to identify probabilities rather than rules and also shows that patterns are not arbitrary but are associated with meaning.
This association though is not predictive. How is the boundary determined between of as a single lexical item and of as part of a phrase? O f cannot remain independent, it must be part of a pattern to convey meaning and the more often it is used in a pattern the more distinctive its meaning becomes. While of appears in the pattern above (verb + of + noun) it cannot be said to be fixed because the words of the pattern are variable and determine the meaning of is to convey. So in phrases like to disapprove of smoking and to speak of the devil, where of is used in the same way it has a different meaning than in of course which is actually a single item using two words (Sinclair 2004). This sort of distinction is not made clear in conventional grammar because many everyday words do not have independent meaning.
Further, as speakers use unusual words in a pattern because they resemble other words used in that pattern, that is, by analogy with a more typical word, any pattern is subject to variation so that while it may be said that a certain group of words occur in a certain pattern it cannot be said that they are the only ones to occur in that pattern (Hunston & Francis 2000). This allows for the creativity involved in language use without which speakers would choose the same words in every circumstance, always saying, for example, I talked him into doing it and never I cajoled him into doing it.
The Collins COBUILD English Dictionary, mentioned above is part of a University of Birmingham project edited by John Sinclair, sponsored by Collins publishers, and first published in 1987. It is the first dictionary to be produced using a corpus, specifically the Bank of English which was developed by the project. Francis et al., (1996, 1998), have published grammars based on patterns of English verbs, nouns, and adjectives researched at COBUILD highlighting the concept of 'pattern' as a major tool in language description.
The growth of corpus linguistics has shown the early work of Hornby (1954) to be justified in its focus on patterns of usage. It has also allowed Hunston and Francis' (2000) ideas on pattern grammar to be observed through actual language use which has helped to clarify a significant connection between patterns and meaning. The importance of this observation to a description of English is evidenced by its contrast with a lexis-based or grammar-based description providing a new description which views lexis and grammar as a single unit. The function performed by pattern grammar in showing how language works is useful for the development of fluency and accuracy for learners of English by helping to provide communicative competence, that is, a persons knowledge of a language and their ability to put that knowledge to use. By providing detail of the behaviour of lexical items a corpus-based description of English may help to provide a new theory of language with implications for lexicography, pedagogy, and psycholinguistics, in fact all areas which focus on language in use.
