The Cryptic Rail (Rallus dubius) is a flightless, shy bird which inhabits some of the isolated Noodle islands in the Indian Ocean. Rallidae are widely distributed across continental and oceanic islands and more than a quarter of extant or recently extinct species are flightless (Trewick, 1997). Rails are definitely known to be present on four out the five islands; amateur observations suggest the population on Litlun is slightly different to those on the other islands. Little is presently known about this species, which is why a programme of research needs to be undertaken in order to conserve it.
Any programme of conservation requires a certain degree of time and money, data suggests that restoring a critically endangered, poorly studied, population to a stage where it requires minimal further management can take seventeen to thirty years (Jones, 2004), incurring various costs along the way. Programmes aiming to restore an endangered species can be divided in to four steps: acquiring knowledge of the species, diagnosis of the causes of population decline, management and monitoring (Jones, 2004). Initial research into the biology and ecology of the species will be costly in terms of time, and as specific personnel will be needed, possibly in terms of money as well; at least one specialist researcher would be needed at this time, though some of the work could be carried out by PhD or MSc students, as well as equipment for catching and sampling the birds. In this first stage genetic analysis of the populations can be carried out. Certain genetic tests can be expensive though the work can be contracted out to prevent the need to purchase specific equipment; details are discussed later. Assessing the reasons for the population sizes on different islands and why they are in decline will, again, take time; this too can include some genetic investigation. Outcomes from this initial study will certainly take both money and, more importantly, time - monitoring of the species may have to be permanent. A summary of what is required is provided in table 1. Management of bird populations has proved worthwhile, Cade and Temple (1995) evaluated the effectiveness of 30 projects and concluded that 43% were considered to have improved population viability and 23% helped stabilise numbers.
An in depth study of the biology and ecology of a species is vital to determining its conservation needs. This initial field study could be limited to a few months in order to get an idea of what needs to be done and then continued over a longer period of time. Population viability analysis (PVA) is often used to assess the extinction risk of a species and data suggests these are far more valuable when based on long-term studies of the populations involved (Brook and Kikkawa, 1998). It is important to look at the rail 's general behaviour, foraging, diet, and nesting sites and requirements, as well as population structure, breeding success, death rates and causes of death. The study can confirm whether there are still any rails on Spank or whether there has been a local extinction. Comparisons with similar or captive populations can be useful to supplement data from field research, there are many similar species of flightless rail that could be investigated; captive individuals can also help train staff in handling techniques (Jones, 2004).
Genetic analysis of each of the island rail populations is extremely important; the genetic fitness of the populations can be examined, as well as the possibility of there being more than one species present. Ninety percent of historic bird extinctions have taken place on islands despite less than twenty percent of the world 's bird species being restricted to them (Myers, 1979) - the difficulty faced by island populations is that they are isolated and often small, such as those on Spink, Aka and Litlun, this can lead to various genetic-based problems such as genetic drift, mutational meltdown and inbreeding depression. It is well documented that there is less genetic variation in smaller populations (Frankham, 1996), low genetic variation reduces the ability to adapt and means the whole population is susceptible to the same things. Low genetic diversity is not helped by genetic drift, where alleles are lost through chance - which alleles are incorporated into gametes and which gametes form zygotes are random processes; isolated populations have no introduction of new alleles so the only opposition to the loss of variation by drift is mutation, which is a rare event (Simberloff, 1998). The opposite of drift is also a problem - mutational meltdown. This is the accumulation and fixation of deleterious alleles, by drift, before natural selection can weed them out (Simberloff, 1998). Inbreeding depression results from the mating of related individuals, there is a higher probability that a gene will be homozygous (both alleles the same) which can lead to lower fitness due to deleterious recessives (Simberloff, 1998).
When a population goes through a bottleneck (declines from a large to a small population and the population has to rebuild from this reduced number) there is debate over the effect on genetic diversity. Studies show that bottlenecks may not be that important - research on the black robin (Petroica traversi), where the current population is known to be derived from a single breeding pair, has shown that it is the robin 's persistence in a single small population over the last 100 years that accounts for the low genetic variation observed rather than the more recent bottleneck (Ardern and Lambert, 1997). It was also noted that despite the lack of variation the black robin was viable under existing conditions. It is possible the three smaller populations on the Noodle islands are in fact healthy and viable, but genetic analysis will confirm or dispute this.
As well as genetic fitness the analysis could identify if there was more than one species present. It is quite likely the population on Litlun is a different species, it has been observed to be more colourful and confiding than the birds on the other islands and the island itself provides a different, higher habitat. However Zwartjes (2003) warns against using morphological comparisons as a quick, field-based assessment of underlying genetic variability, so genetic analysis of all populations is vital. There is also the possibility that all of the islands have there own subspecies. Populations can evolve into different species if they are isolated geographically, this is known as allopatric speciation. The four Noodle populations are isolated from each other completely and, depending on the length of time since this isolation, they may have evolved slightly differently.
For genetic analysis to take place samples of DNA must first be collected; Taberlet and Bouvet (1991) suggest that the tissue found on a plucked feather is an adequate source of DNA for bird genetic studies; it can be amplified by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), a technique used to replicate a small amount of DNA so there is more to work with. Collecting feathers would be easier than taking blood samples; freshly plucked, growing feathers are best but naturally shed feathers have also proved useful (Rudnick et al, 2005) and less time consuming to collect, however, for thorough analysis of the population birds would need to be caught, sampled and tagged/ringed. Legal and ethical issues must be taken into consideration when catching/sampling birds.
Often mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is used for analysis, particularly for looking at the relationship between populations, as it has a higher level of mutation and therefore more variation. It is also not recombined during meiosis so has a clear line of descent, and there is only one allele per individual making it easy to work with (Dawson, 2004). Mundy et al (1997) used mtDNA sequence variation to confirm the evolutionary distinctiveness of the endangered San Clemente Island loggerhead shrike (Lanius ludovicianus mearnsi) from other neighbouring loggerhead shrike populations.
The DNA fingerprint is unique, it is produced by using enzymes to 'cut' DNA into various fragment lengths that are different in each individual. Minisatellite and microsatellite DNA markers are used in DNA fingerprinting - satellites are repeated sequences of DNA and individuals have varying numbers or repeats, microsatellites have the smallest number of repeats (Dawson, 1994). Satellites are used to identify individuals and their familial relationships (Turner et al, 1997). In their genetic study of the New Zealand kakapo (Strigops habroptilus), Miller et al (2003) noted that minisatellite DNA markers can be more useful in situations where microsatellite DNA fails to show sufficient variation. Randomly amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD) markers are also very useful; Nusser et al (1996) used RAPD analysis to study the light-footed clapper rail (Rallus longirostris levipes), as it requires very small amounts of DNA (nanograms), no prior knowledge of the genetic sequence and is relatively simple and inexpensive. When using the DNA from feathers Taberlet and Bouvet (1991) noted that there was not enough material to perform DNA fingerprinting studies but genomic fingerprinting using RAPD analysis was suitable.
There are several techniques available, RAPD analysis, in conjunction with PCR, would be recommended as it is simple and cost-effective.
Examining the reasons for the small populations on three of the islands could start to be carried out around the same time as the field study of the species is going on, collating new found knowledge with any previous information on distribution and population trends. Causes of death, breeding success, impacts of weather and any habitat/diet requirement that is unavailable to the birds need to be looked at in particular (Jones, 2004). The biggest cause of population decline is known to be habitat destruction, usually from human interference. Another big problem is the introduction of exotic species, again due to humans, that either compete with the endemic population for resources of predate on them; there may also have been the introduction of diseases. These human influences are probably the reason for the perceived extinction of rails on Spank. The population on Aka may be suffering due to adverse environmental conditions, it has been noted that the Cryptic Rail prefers inland areas, rather than the coast, and as Aka has been reduced in size, due to wave action, there may be fewer suitable areas for the birds.
The genetic analysis will also help with this part of the study. It may have identified a lack of variation which could indicate an unhealthy population and that all the individuals are susceptible to the same diseases and adverse conditions. It could also identify any genetic diseases affecting the species. The importance of combining field research with genetic analysis is shown by a study of the Seychelle warbler (Acrocephalus sechellensis) (Komdeur et al, 1998); it was shown that although the population had low genetic variability its lack of reproductive success compared to mainland populations was due to variations in food supply rather than genetic differences. It was also noted that the warblers did not show signs of inbreeding depression despite being founded by less than 30 individuals.
Once the current problems have been identified, as well as any potential future problems, management of the species can begin. In other projects this has included habitat restoration, supplementary feeding, artificial nest sites, predator removal/exclusion, captive breeding and translocation/reintroduction (Jones, 2004). The populations on Bigun and Litlun may not need much interference; the population on Bigun is large and probably quite healthy so may simply require some guaranteed protection from humans and animals to ensure the perseverance of the species; the birds on Litlun may be a different species and as it is isolated and the island is not visited by people it may be more cost-efficient to leave this population alone.
If the genetic studies showed a lack of variation in the small populations then translocation of individuals between populations may provide some of the new genetic material needed. In this circumstance the genetic analysis of individual birds will show which are the most appropriate birds to translocate and ecological studies will have shown the social structure of rail populations - whether to move pairs/individuals/groups. However this could lead to outbreeding depression - the birds may have genetic adaptations to their specific islands and bringing in new genes from another population might damage these; the further the genetic distance between the populations the greater the effect of the outbreeding (Edmands and Timmerman, 2003). It may become necessary to relocate the entire population of Aka as information suggests the island is shrinking due to increased wave action and there is the possibility the island will disappear completely. The population could be moved to Spank, where it is thought the rail population has died out, though the reasons for this local extinction would first have to be addressed as it may not be viable to reintroduce a population due to human use of the island. If a new population needed constant attention for survival, such as continual re-seeding, or the impact on human activities was too great, then it might not be worth it.
If it appeared that any population was in rapid decline a captive population could be bred while the necessary changes were made - habitat restoration, predator removal, etc. If this new population was based on individuals from just one of the islands then they may suffer the same genetic problems as any small population, this is known as the founder effect. However, captive breeding is an extremely expensive process.
Once the different populations of rails appear stable they must be monitored. This again requires field research to keep up to date with the general health of the populations - breeding success, death rates, etc. It may be that the species does not need any other interference, other than education of local people to ensure the birds' habitat is secure, but there is also the possibility that it will require long-term conservation. A local warden could be responsible for monitoring; costs must then account for an annual salary. The island populations may need frequent re-seeding, continuing genetic analysis will show changes in variation within the populations.
As shown, conservation research takes time and money if it is to be effective. The four-step programme presented identifies the main areas of work that will need to be carried out. It also highlights the importance of genetic analysis - in assessing the health of the populations, identifying if there is more than one species, choosing the right individuals for translocation and sequencing the whole genome. RAPD analysis, with PCR, using DNA collected from feathers would be the most cost-effective technique. A summary of what should be carried out on each island is provided in table 2.
