Farm diversification means a variety of different things to people, with ideas ranging from growing a wider range of produce to spread risk, to increasing the amount of income sourced from outside the agricultural industry or changing the use and marketing of a farm asset to add additional value to their worth over what its traditional agricultural use obtained (Soffee 2003). This report looks closely at the offering of livery services as a form of diversification as well as other forms of diversification, as many farmers are now using this to source more income by converting existing less utilizable buildings and land. The report includes practical steps Pat Sarsfield took when he gave up farming his own arable land to focus on diversification on a holding at Hall where he originally converted his small barns into stables for livery.
At the heart of any agricultural enterprise is marketing, as there must be demand for what is produced before you consider how to make it and what price to sell it at. In the UK in recent years the widening gap between farmers and consumers of their traditional products has led to an increase in farm diversification to allow farmers to regain some control of what they marketing to the public and how. A 2006 survey by DEFRA found 46% of farms now have diversity projects generating an average annual income of   10,900 a year dominantly from lettings of converted farm buildings (Nix 2006). Other popular diversification schemes include selling produce straight to the consumer and entering agri-environment schemes both of which require some sort of direct marketing to the general public. Visits Andrew Ingams farm, where Christmas trees were grown on his land and marketed direct to the public through a Christmas retail centre on the farm and the Manydown Farm Co. where the farm 's own livestock was sold through their own on farm butcher shop were examples where farms had mastered the marketing of their own produce to the public perfectly to achieve higher gross margins on what they produced. Diversification into livery by a farmer means they are offering the use of assets of land and/or buildings to consumers oppose to a food or fibre product, meaning substantial demand for livery services must exist within close proximity of the intended site as the product cannot be transported to the consumer, but it is the consumer who must travel to the product. So the initial step to diversification is assessing potential demand for product using the tools of market research, local knowledge and evaluation of local competing businesses. Market research data will also become invaluable at the later stages of development in helping to decide what scale of scheme can be sustained by the local market demand, what facilities customers most want that what will differentiate a particular livery site from the competition if the market is concentrated. Market research may also prove vital when sourcing capital, as proves to potential investors or banks that diversification in livery services will see safe and increased financial returns. The equine industry is the second largest land based industry in the England and the biggest employer in rural economies (Nix 2006). It is also an industry that is expanding rapidly and despite the large costs involved for horse owners, there is a massive 1.2 million horses in the UK (Farmers Weekly 2005). So scope for livery businesses success appears to have promising potential, however the number of farmers diversifying into this sector is also huge, meaning in most areas horse owners often have a choice of livery stables to keep their horse in. Pat Sarsfield knew of three nearby farms also now offering livery stables since he first diversified and commented that new entrants will need to differentiate and market their stables well if they are to be successful. Once a target market has been established and their needs identified a site must be chosen and built to meet these demands.
Location is the prime factor that should be considered when diversifying. Often diversification plans involve use of redundant farm building, so location is already determined but still the following factors must be considered carefully before conversion begins. The general public may need access by foot (environmental schemes) or usually by vehicle. In the case of livery, good road access is essential so it is easy and convenient for customers to reach their horse everyday and roads and yards should be wide enough to accommodate horse trailers and trucks with ease. Good riding routes or bridleways must be within close proximity of stables without the need to use busy roads to access them. Access to open grass grazing in the summer is also an essential factor for many horse owners. Security is also a priority not only of the horses themselves but the valuable equipment associated with keeping them such as trailers and tack. Customers will be reassured by security measures and a person living on site. Sites should also have adequate utilities supplies to them such as electric and water, with scope for potential future expansion if necessary. Potential for building expansion, including planning permission considerations (stables are not classed as an agricultural use) is also a good idea if you are serious about diversification. If any of these attractions are missing cost of upgrading faculties must be carefully evaluated before proceeding. Pat believed his sites proximity to superb local bridleway rides, moderate road access whilst remaining secluded from potential thieves and existing small farm sheds made his site a viable diversification option, without to much investment as many attractions already existed. As his livery has expanded over the years he has also added an all weather exercise arena which he believes is a vital attraction for customers to ensure his stables remain full and ahead of competitors. This was a major cost to his business as all arena requires full drainage, a gravel base, covered with special silica sand, lots of post and rail fencing and he had high specification rubber riding surface made from waste tyres that had the steel wires removed which were very costly. The cost of this work can vary between   10,000 and   25,000 depending on size and quality of work (Nix 2006) but yet Pat only charged his customers an additional   8 a week on top of their standard livery fee for those wanting to make use of the facility. Other options that can attract customers to a livery include cross country courses, horse exercisers, floodlit arenas and even swimming pools are popular with owners of horses recovering from injury but all of which carry massive instillation and maintenance costs throughout their lifespan and will need planning permission before building. Where livery 's are not in close proximity to good bridleways or good riding areas it can prove a profitable enterprise to create riding paths across farmland that riders pay to use each time they ride it. These toll rides are another possible idea for diversification.
Most diversification schemes require administration and horse livery is no exception to this, as in this competitive sector horse owners are looking for high levels of service. As well as planning permission being required for structures built or converted, it is now necessary to change the land use from agricultural to business. Customers may expect fire safety and security equipment on site. There are three different levels of service a livery operator can offer horse owners, beginning with basic grass livery in a field with a form of shelter and cover for feed and tack, DIY livery where a central stable is provided often with grazing and exercise facilities but owner is still responsible for the day to day keeping and grooming if their horse and finally board livery where owner is still responsible for some of the horses keeping but many routine tasks such as turning and mucking out are done by a stable hand. Typical prices charged for livery vary quality of stables provided but average prices for theses forms of livery are   20-25,   35-40 and   65 per week respectively (Nix 2006). After initially offering board livery with an employed stable hand, Pat realised there was an increasing demand just for DIY livery so decided to concentrate solely on this four years ago. He charges a competitive price   21.50 a week which including one and half acres of separate grazing and all of his 21 stables are filled. In financial terms, gross margins are small from livery as initial costs are huge, costing nearly   1000 per stable for walls, gates, floor matting, fencing and ongoing utility bills. Pat commented that much of his profit is generated by selling value added products to his customers, such as hay, routine medicines and bedding all of which he buys in bulk at discount prices but offers to his customers at slightly cheaper prices than they could find elsewhere. Other costs and recommendations Pat made many recommendations about how to manage a livery and removing costly liable pitfalls that could see a livery owner lose money. Firstly he suggested public liability insurance is sourced (should be considered for most diversification where public come onto farm property) as individuals insurance may not guarantee them to be covered in a public livery. Housing should include good ventilation and be as dust free as possible as horses are susceptible to respiratory problems and water should not be piped to individual stables as it adds cost in building and leaves pipes open to frost damage which could do terrible damage to horses and buildings. Grazing fields should be fenced externally not using cheaper wire fences as are hard for horses to see and may cause expensive injury to a horse if they catch it accidentally. Mares and geldings should not be grazed together in case of damage or fighting. Finally he recommended a strict written agreement be made between the customer and livery owner so it is legally established obligations customers must abide by (such as worming etc) and how they are expected to behave in the stables and that they are responsible for damage caused or accidents and not the livery owner. Consider these issues during diversification and your chances of success are much more guaranteed!.
