For Task 1 I decided to analyse a music video (Aberfeldy 's "Love is an Arrow") where I felt that the use of multiple modes deeply effected the meaning of the song, emphasising certain parts and offering meaning in others where previously things had been left ambiguous. The visual pictures also put the song in the context of a specific relationship instead of mere musings on the emotion of love.
For Task 2 I interviewed school age children to try and find out their thoughts on their own use of language and see what they thought about the use of non-standard forms in school.
As I will explain in my conclusion, both of these tasks are only small parts of far more wide reaching debates and issues in Applied English Language Studies.
I have chosen a number of scenes which I think show the best examples of the various modes combining to alter the message just a single mode on its own would give.
The ending scenes 34 to 37 (see Appendix 1) are a good example of where the visual images actually alter the meaning of the other two modes; the music and the words. Whereas the words here; (see Appendix 2) "it tells me how its gonna be," leave the song open ended (neither a positive or negative connotation can be perceived from this line), the visual mode gives the song a negative outcome.
The Paralanguage of "Eskimo Boy" throughout the piece strengthens and alters our perception of the song. The facial expressions of Eskimo Boy and Eskimo Girl in scene 10 for instance; both perfectly complement the jaunty instrumental playing at the time. Looking at scene 36 again, the facial expression of Eskimo boy is so blank and sad looking it gives the song a negative ending not conveyed in the words or music which stays quite upbeat throughout.
Certain scenes are made to fit in with certain words sometimes hinting at the outcome. For example in scene 20 as the singer sings the phrase "two faced liar" in the line "Love is a good way to lose a friend, It 's a two-faced liar that you ca n't defend" the camera cuts to a picture of Eskimo girl. Given the ending of the song this is unlikely to be a coincidence. Scenes 7 and 8 which accompany the line "Love is an arrow and it points at you" indicate that Eskimo boy is going to fall in love with Eskimo girl. The word "arrow" in the above line goes with footage of a snowball (as though filmed from the snowball) hurtling towards Eskimo boy like a metaphorical arrow. The word "You" is combined with the impact of the snowball to emphasise this.
Early on in the song the three modes combine to show that the two main characters are in love. The visuals use "symbols" which; generally accepted convention rules, represent certain common signifieds. There is the giant heart in scene 14, the holding of hands in scene 10 and the rosy cheeks of scenes 9,10, 13 and 14 all of which have connotations of love. The music of the text stays fairly constant throughout and is fairly jaunty and cheery sounding which complements these early scenes well. Many of the early lines of the song such as lines 6 and 7, are cheery sounding and frivolous like the music and pictures.
Cook 's definition in "The discourse of Advertising," Cook Guy, 4.1.1, p63, 1996, Routledge, borrowing from Saussure 's and Peirce 's works.
I am interested in people 's opinions on the appropriateness of use of non-standard forms. Debates on this are often highly critical of youngster 's use of language. I am interested in how children view their own use of non-standard forms, especially in schools which are often criticised for not being strict enough on them. I wish to find children 's opinions as they rarely contribute to such debates. Do they believe they should be allowed to use non-standard forms such as regional dialect words, slang and should they be punished for such usages and other non-standards such as incorrect spellings?.
I set up the interviews with two people I know, but not that well - I wanted to avoid people I knew well in case their knowledge of my own opinions influenced them. Both are in secondary school at the moment. I tried to make the room where I conducted the interviews as relaxed as possible to reduce the effects of observer 's paradox. I tried a semi-structured approach with a list of main issues/topics I wanted to cover each with a set of prompts in case the interview was n't eliciting any great response. In actual fact both participants seemed eager to talk and the interviews flowed well covering the points I wanted with minimal prompting.
One of the interesting things about this research is the lack of other works to look at - while we are used to seeing children 's use of language discussed we very rarely hear the children 's view point. I therefore went into the interviews with an open mind not really knowing what school age children of today would make of the issue. My only clue was that one of my participants was dyslexic making me think that they were more likely than most to hold strong opinions on the subject as they have probably been penalised for misspellings more than most.
In fact my findings turned out to be remarkably similar. This is interesting as both are from very different social backgrounds and as I mentioned one is dyslexic and one is n't. To have such similar opinions from such different people suggests that it is the fact that they are children which makes them think the same and not a question of class or any other variable. Obviously it would be rash to claim all children think alike on the basis of two results but further research would be interesting. So what were these results? Put simply both participants believed that people should be allowed to use non-standard forms in school both in the class room or playground as well as in academic work. They both agreed that slang words and regional dialect words should be allowed to be used arguing "it does n't matter if they're slang, they're still words." As one participant argued in response to a question asking how they felt when people told them to speak properly etc when they used slang; "Sometimes it 's the adults and old people that use words we do n't understand." What both children were most insistent on was the issue of spelling; they felt that whilst spelling was important so that everyone could understand each other, most spelling mistakes were "really small and you can still understand the word"4 and so you should n't be marked down for them.
Interviewee 1 /4 Interviewee 2.
Both the multi-modal text analysis and the interview are important in the world of Applied English Language Studies. This is because they both concern wider issues than the limited parameters each individual analysis in each individual task provide.
This interview helps provide real life data for the wider English Language debate it concerns; the Descriptivism/Prescriptivism debate. It is especially relevant for Applied English Language Studies as it provides a voice for a group who despite the prescriptivism campaign often being aimed against them, rarely get a chance to engage in the debate.
The multi-modal text analysis also concerns wider issues than the individual example of some cute cartoon Eskimos breaking up would make you imagine. If we look at what is actually happening we see that pictures and music are being used to alter the meanings of text. It makes sense that this could work vice versa with words altering the meaning of pictures. The implications of this are huge. Moving away from the sphere of music videos and the potential of multi-modal texts is huge and important; The way we perceive the television news for instance, who we identify as 'the bad guys' in certain news stories, could all be altered by a certain combination of words with certain pictures or music. Effectively we are saying multi-modal texts could shape our opinions. It is through Applied Language Studies that people can see through such manipulation.
