The purpose of this practical was to apply the method of nested quadrats for recording the relationship between quadrat size and number of recorded species over an area of 640*640cm 2. About 23 species were expected to be found.
The initial quadrdat was of 1.25*1.25cm 2, it was doubled in area with 18 subsequent steps. Species new to the doubled quadrat were recorded. A series of 5 graphs was elaborated from the results: 21 species were found in the quadrat, which is two less as the expected 23. Either nature did not stick to our expectations in this case, or human error is the cause for finding less species. The results from graphs 1) and 2) show the same function as 3). This suggests that the minimal area concept is fraud, no matter how big the sampled area, increasing the size has an exponential effect on the number of species found. Graph 5) shows a straight line with the function which shows constant increase of numbers of newly found species with growing area. For this reason the utilisation of standardised quadrat sizes is a general agreement. This is 2x2m for heathland.
The purpose of this practical was to find out if tree distribution in a beechwood is random, in a planted pattern or clumped. Plotless sampling was used as a way of measurement.
The Chiltern Hills result from earth movements of the southernmost extension of the MIOS 12 or Anglian glaciation. The underground material is clay with flint, producing acid soil conditions. Wood shortage in the 15 th century led to an Act of Parliament in 1483 by Edward IV which decided on the enclosure of woodland for 7 years after coppicing to keep out all beasts. Ditches and banks were built to enclose woodland.
In the mid 18 th century sheep farming became unrentable in England. Due to soil and economic factors about 150 years ago beech trees were planted here. Nowadays the NVC vegetation type on the plateau is W 15 Fagus sylvatica-Deschampsia flexuosa woodland, a species poor forest with holly in it.
Going down the slope a less acid underground material is found (brown earths), there W 14 Fagus sylvatica-Rubus fruticosus woodland with abundant holly, brambles and bracken is found.
On the valley bottom and the other side of the slope an alkaline, free draining soil favours the W 12 Fagus sylvatica-Mercurialis perennis woodland, with ash, yew, hawthorn and field maple present. Holly is sparse here, the herbaceous flora is comparably richer as on the first two sites. W 12 contains indicators of ancient woodland like Acer campestre.
Distance between beech trees were measured using a method of taking the distance between 2 trees, then moving on in the same direction for a fixed number of steps, then taking distance measurement again and so on. Fmeters was the distance from the random point to the nearest tree, Bmeters was the distance from the last measured tree to the closest neighbour beech tree. Density was then calculated using the formulas:
Plant distribution (Y) was calculated using:
The results reveal that with Y= -0.089 the beach trees are not perfectly random distributed in the forest, but they seemed to be regularly planted. The number of trees per area is calculated with about 190 trees/ha.
The planted structure of the Chiltern beechwoods is also revealed by the fact that it the dominant tree, the beach, is of an even age. Beech trees here are about 150-200 years old, thus they are at the end of their life span. The tree density indicates that the trees were planted for timber production, because it is relatively low and straight growth is required. Nevertheless centuries of felling straight trees resulted in fruiting mainly of bent, unfavourable trees. The seeds of these bent trees were then replanted, and thus nowadays many of these trees are not growing straight.
Tree regeneration is difficult in these old beech woods because young trees and seedlings are damaged by munjacks and squirrels.
A transect was made through a hill at Broadmoor heath in this practical. The purpose was to distinguish between different types of vegetation along a gradient, and to relate them to the underground material.
Along a 120m long transect line 6 random quadrats were examined by different groups of students. The quadrat size was 2x2m. The results were put together to a transectional description of different NVA vegetation types within that location.
Both own quadrats belong to the NVC M16 Ericetum tetralicis wet heath.
Quadrats from other groups were not recorded in detail, but staring from the hilltop and ending after 120m revealed the following:
Similar to Decoy heath, the hilltop of Broadmoor heath has free draining gravel/flintstone as underlying material, which makes it an impoverished acid podzol. The dominant plateau vegetation is a mix of Calluna vulgaris, Erica cinerea, Ulex minor (very low quantities), Molinia caerulea, Deschampsia flexuosa, Betula sp. Quercus robur, Pinus sylvestris, and on sites with sand accumulation Pteridium aquilinum. It is a H2 Calluna vulgaris-Ulex minor heath.
Going downhill Pteridium aquilinum becomes more dominant due to a more sandy soil. Crossing a little path horizontally which cuts the hill, trees disappear (except seedlings). With increasing wetness Erica tetralix, Molinia caerulea, Carex binervus, Juncus conglomeratus, effusus and squarrosus gain quantity while Calluna vulgaris decreases. This changes the classification to M16 Erica tetralix-Sphagnum compactum wet heath. From drier to wetter areas Calluna is replaced by Erica tetralix, Molinia caerulea, Carex spp. and Eriophorum angustifolium. On the foot of the hill waterlogging occurs due to Gley soils. Sphagnum mosses start to grow, with Sphagnum tenellum and capillifolium at the borders and on top of little hammocks, S. palustris growing in partly flooded areas and S. cuspidatum submerged. Blanket peat formation takes place. These zones are called M 21a Narthecio-Sphagnetum valley bogs and M 30 Related vegetation of seasonally-inundated habitats. In the waterlogged zone Rhynchospora alba, Drosera spp., Narthecium ossifragnum and Potamogetum spp. occur. At the end of the transect W 4 Betula pubescens-Molinia caerulea woodland is growing.
Different heath succession phases can be seen along the transect. The top of the hill has a lot of young trees growing (up to 3 meter), which indicates heath in the mature stage. The differential species Ulex minor was found in very few quantities in the H 2 community. Factors like burning or grazing might have influenced this low appearance, nevertheless about 25 % cover are frequently found in heather in the building stage. The M16 zone seemed to be burnt about 10 years ago as indicated by a lack of trees and rich acrocarpous moss and Cladonia spp. growth in the upper quadrat. The lack of the preferenital species Sphagnum compactum even in the lower quadrat, where water puddles indicated the start of gley soils, is a bit strange. Perhaps we did not find it, or the slope was not oligotrophic enough. The presence of Erica tetralix and lower quantities of Calluna vulgaris in the lower quadrat also clearly indicate waterlogged soil. The lower parts of M 16 however did show Sphagnum compactum growth. The M 21a Narthecio-Sphagnetum is dominated by S. palustris, S. capilifolium, S. papillosum, and S. recurvum, acid (pH 3.5-4.5) and oligotrophic mineral soils or shallow peat influence the vegetation as well as at least seasonal waterlogging. This community is largely confined to relatively dry British Lowlands, surroundings of valley-mires. The quantity of S. papillosum makes a good boundary to the wetter Sphagnetalia .The M 30 occurs on seasonally inundated, base poor and moderately enriched waters.
Altogether a classic sequence of communities which grade into each other can be seen here.
Silchester Heath was visited in order to examine differences in vegetation which result from regular burning. Cyclical succession results from traditional management practices.
Each of the 6 groups examined 5 quadrats of 2x2m, and recorded the following data: maximal height of Calluna, maximal diameter of stem, age of stem (by counting growth rings), and percentage cover of encountered species and of bare ground.
Cyclical burning is the traditional way of management for heathland with the aim to provide fresh growth as animal fodder. Ideally burning happens every 15 years. In this case the heather was burned with 21 years, as revealed by counting of growth rings. Cyclical succession stages are:
Pioneer phase in first 5 years: Light and space is not limited for plant growth. Acrocarpous mosses, new heath shoots and ruderal species seedlings form a dominant herb layer in the first 2 years. Bare ground is reduced very quickly. In the following years the herb layer declines soon. Ulex growth is slower than that of ericoids. Cladonia squamules start growing, but it is difficult to identify them without podetia. Cladonia coccifera and C. floerkeana are among the first ones to colonize the new terrain.
Building phase from 5 to 15 years: Maximal height is reached for ericoids, with maximum canopy density. Cladoniaspp. take over place of ruderal herb layer. Acrocarpous mosses cover the ground to some extent, while pleurocarpous mosses take over their place in the mature phase, when light is the limiting factor for acrocarpous moss growth.
Mature phase from 15 to 25 years: No changes in height, the girth of ericoids continues to grow. Ulex peaks with heather, forming about 25% of cover. Cladonia spp. are insignificant in this phase because they are shaded out or overgrown by pleurocarpous mosses.
Degenerate phase from 25 years onwards: lateral shoots collapse, decrease in height, gaps are visible. Few heathers get older than 33 years. The onset of this phase is marked by an abrupt rise in quantity and variety of lichens as light levels increase, and reindeer lichens are common.
Cladonia sp. seem to peak in the 10 th year after burning, with about 66% cover and a mean of 8 lichen sp. per 4 m 2. Aqueous extracts from detached podetia and leachates seem to have suppressive properties on seeds of competing plants, inhibiting germination and establishment of vascular plants. In this way they can maintain themselves in otherwise closed heathland stands.
The established graphs for height and percentage cover do not always perfectly reflect the succession phases described above. The height of the 10 year old heather for example is not any higher as for the 6 year old. This may not mean anything, but the lichen plot for example is definitely indicating under recording in year 6 (our own group). We could not agree on the percentage cover here and thus it was simply omitted (bad mistake I know). Also the percentage of bare ground to mosses might not have been recorded correctly because it is difficult to judge and tell apart real bare ground from little mosses. The percentage cover of the Calluna and Erica however reflects very nicely the dynamics in vegetation, because the two plots "mirror" each other: one peaks and the other goes significantly down in the same patch of vegetation.
