The objective of this study was to analyse chocolate purchases with respect to individual supermarkets, types of chocolate and customer characteristics.
The independent sample t-test was chosen to test the null hypothesis that 'customers with kids spend the same amount on chocolate as those without' because it compares two means within the same variable. It tests whether the two means are equal or alternatively if they show a significant difference. The T-test is based on the assumption that the sample mean is normally distributed across the sample.
The ANOVA F test was chosen to find out whether the amount spent on chocolate is significantly different across 3 categories of TV watchers (light, medium and heavy). This test is appropriate because it can compare several means simultaneously while avoiding the error that may occur in performing multiple t-tests. The null hypothesis is that all the means are equal and it is rejected if one of them differs. The F (Fisher) ratio compares the variance within sample groups with the variance between groups and is the basis for ANOVA. If the calculated F value is more than the critical F value then H0 (the means are equal) is rejected and H1(there is a significant difference between the means) is accepted.
This test assumes that the sample is normally distributed and has equal variances.
The P value is used to test the statistical significance of the T and F values.
If the P value is greater than alpha (which depends on the significance level) then the results are statistically significant and can therefore be used to draw conclusions.
The table below shows the average expenditure for 3 different chocolate types across 6 supermarkets by age group. The following information is represented in a series of graphs and discussed below.
The graph to the left shows that for every type of chocolate, expenditure is highest for the 56-70 age group and lowest for those aged 25-40. This however varies within in each supermarket, demonstrated in the rest of the graphs on the page. Focusing on Sainsbury, organic chocolate expenditure follows the same pattern as above, whereas fair trade and standard chocolate vary. Fair trade chocolate has the highest expenditure within the 41-55 age bracket at   1.76 and the lowest in the 25-40 range at 72p. Standard chocolate expenditure is highest within the 41-55 age range at   1.64 and lowest in the 56-70 range where no chocolate at all was purchased. The 71 - 85 age range does not appear on the graph at all because they do not shop at Sainsbury.
The standard deviation for fair-trade and standard chocolate across all age groups is considerably higher than the standard deviation for organic chocolate indicating a larger variation from the sample mean for these two types of chocolate. A large variation suggests that the precision of the sample; in terms of being able to replicate the values if the research was conducted again, is low. The width of the confidence intervals and the standard error values also reflect the reliability of the mean. The wider confidence intervals and higher standard error of mean values indicate a less reliable mean. The widest confidence interval is for fair trade chocolate within the 56-70 age group, this is due to the smaller sample size, which makes the results more difficult to replicate.
The table and graph below clearly show that, in general, average chocolate expenditure for all types of chocolate is greater for those customers with kids than it is for those without. The difference is particularly noticeable for fair trade and organic chocolate types. The difference in average chocolate expenditure between those with kids and those without for fair trade chocolate is   1.11 and for organic chocolate is   1.10 whereas for standard chocolate the difference is only 31p.
Ho: Customers with kids spend the same amount in chocolate as those without.
H1: Customers with kids do not spend the same amount in chocolate as those without.
From the independent sample means test (see appendix: test 1) the T statistic is 4.206 which is above the critical T values in the table even at the 0.1% significance level which means that if the T statistic is significant we can be 99.9% certain in rejecting H0. The P value given is 0 which is clearly less than the threshold given by any significance level which means the results are statistically significant. Ho is rejected and H1 accepted. There is a significant difference between the amount spent on chocolate by those customers with kids and the amount spent by those without. The graphs above tell us that the relationship is positive so it can be said that customers with kids spend significantly more on fair-trade chocolate than those without. In this case there is only a 0.1% chance that a type one error has occurred.
The T statistic for this test is 3.474 which again is above the critical T values in the table even at the 0.1% significance level meaning that if the T statistic is significant we can be 99.9% certain in rejecting H0. The P value of 0 indicates that the T statistic is significant so H0 is rejected and H1 accepted. There is a significant difference between the amount spent on organic chocolate by customers with kids and the amount spent by those without. Again the graphs above show a positive relationship between the two so customers with kids spend significantly more on organic chocolate than those without.
Again there is only a 0.1% chance that a type one error has occurred.
The T statistic in this test is 1.143 which does not exceed the critical T values for any acceptable level of significance, therefore if the result is significant H0 must be accepted and H1 rejected. The P value of 0.001 shows a 99.8% significant result therefore H0 is accepted and H1 rejected. There is no significant difference between the amount spent on standard chocolate by those with kids compared to those without.
Average chocolate expenditure and the difference in    's for Sainsbury 's customers with and without kids:
The case of Sainsbury follows the same general pattern. Customers with kids tend to spend more on fair trade and organic chocolate than those without. For fair trade chocolate, customers with kids spend on average   1.49 more than those without, and for organic the difference is   2.92. Again, there does not seem to be a considerable difference for standard chocolate. Customers with kids appear to spend on average 2p less than those without.
The critical T value at 33 degrees of freedom is smaller than the calculated T statistic for this test right up to the 1% significance level, which means if the result is statistically significant; we can be 99% certain in rejecting Ho and accepting H1.
The T statistic in this test gives a P value of 0.001 which means the test statistic is 99.8% significant, so for Sainsbury, a customer having kids does influence the amount spent on fair-trade chocolate. The graphs show that this influence is positive, that customers with kids spend more on chocolate than those without.
In this case there is only a 1% chance that a type one error could have occurred.
The tabulated T value for this test is smaller than the calculated T value only up to the 20% significance level; therefore if the result is statistically significant we can only be 80% certain in rejecting Ho and accepting H1.
The P value given in this test is 0.738 which is clearly above any acceptable level of significance which means we cannot accept these results as conclusive.
The critical T value for this test is not less than the calculated T value (-0.019) at any acceptable level of significance therefore if the result is statistically significant, Ho would be accepted and H1 rejected. As reflected in the graph there is very little difference between the purchases.
However, the P value of 0.985 shows that the result is almost 100% insignificant.
From the graph and table above it is clear that medium TV watchers have the highest average expenditure on all three types of chocolate. Light watchers on average do not purchase fair trade or organic chocolate while heavy watchers have the lowest average expenditure for standard chocolate.
The table and graph above show that Sainsbury 's medium television watchers, on average, spend the most on all three types of chocolate and that light TV watchers do not purchase chocolate at all. Heavy watchers are shown to purchase considerably more of fair-trade and organic chocolate than standard, whereas medium watchers purchase more of standard chocolate than the other types.
Ho: The amount of TV hours watched is irrelevant in explaining chocolate expenditure. (The means are all equal).
H1: The amount of TV hours watched is a relevant factor in explaining chocolate expenditure. (The means are significantly different).
From the results of the test summarised in the table above, the F statistic exceeds the critical F value of 4.605 where P = 0.01 which means that if the result is significant, we can be 99% confident in rejecting H0. The P value of 0 indicates a 100% significant result therefore H0 is rejected and H1 accepted. The amount of TV hours watched is relevant in explaining organic chocolate expenditure.
The F statistic in this test does not exceed the tabulated F values at any acceptable level of significance (F 0.1 = 2.3) so if the result is significant statistically then H0 must be accepted and H1 rejected. The P value of 0.106 is below the 90% significance level (0.1) but only just which indicates that the result is not extensively insignificant and can be accepted at a slightly lower level of reliability.
The F statistic in this test exceeds the critical F value of 4.605 where P = 0.01 which means that if the result is significant, we can be 99% confident in rejecting H0. The P value of 0 indicates a 100% significant result therefore H0 is rejected and H1 accepted. The amount of TV hours watched is relevant in explaining fair trade chocolate expenditure.
The F value in this test is below the critical F value of 2.489 where P=0.10 so if the statistic is significant H0 must be accepted and H1 rejected.
The P value indicates a significance level of 0.122 which tells us we can only be 87.8% (100 - 12.2) confident that this result is significant. The results of this test are not significant enough to draw conclusions from.
Again the F value in this test is below the critical F value of 2.489 where P=0.10 so if the statistic is significant H0 must be accepted and H1 rejected.
The P value indicates a significance level of 0.377 means we can only be 62.3% (100 - 37.7) confident that this result is significant. This particular result is definitely not reliable enough to draw conclusions from.
In this test the calculated F value exceeds the critical F value (2.489) where P=0.10 which means that if the result is statistically significant then we can be 90% certain in rejecting H0.
The P value of 0.68 means we can be 93.2% (100 - 6.8) confident that this result is significant so H0 is rejected and H1 accepted. The amount of TV hours watched is relevant in explaining organic chocolate expenditure for Sainsbury 's customers.
This method is limited, particularly in analysing whether there is a significant difference between light medium and heavy TV watchers because it only identifies significant differences between the categories as a whole. It does not tell you which categories differ from one another. The HSD or Tukey Test could be used to locate where the differences arise.
From the results of task 1 it can be concluded that, in general terms the 56-70 age group spend the most on chocolate therefore marketing strategies in general should concentrate on this age bracket. However, general advice may not be particularly helpful as this pattern varies for each individual supermarket.
The case of Sainsbury follows the general pattern with the 56-70 age group spending the most on chocolate and therefore marketing strategies focusing on this age range are likely to benefit Sainsbury. It is also important for Sainsbury to know their market segment age-groups for each chocolate type in order to decide how to focus their marketing strategies. The 56-70 age group showed the highest expenditure for organic chocolate and the 41-55 age range for organic and fair trade chocolate.
The results of the independent sample T-test showed that kids were an influential factor in determining the amount spent on fair trade and organic chocolate but there was no significant difference in expenditure for standard chocolate. Again this pattern varies for each supermarket.
For Sainsbury, the results from the independent samples t tests were only significant for fair-trade chocolate where customers having kids' was seen to make a significant positive difference to the amount spent on this chocolate type.
It would therefore be profitable for Sainsbury to encourage more customers with kids to shop at the store and at the same time retain existing customers with kids as there is evidence that they spend more on at least one type of chocolate than those without kids. One incentive to get customers with children shopping in Sainsbury might be to introduce a kids section of the supermarket. Existing customers with kids can be retained through promotions linked to loyalty schemes, for example sending them samples to promote new fair-trade products.
In the knowledge that customers with kids spend more on fair-trade chocolate Sainsbury could develop marketing strategies focusing on this target segment, for example an advertising campaign directed at children promoting fair trade chocolate in a way that fits their desires. A simpler method could be to put fair-trade chocolate at a lower position on the shelves, at a child 's eye level as oppose to an adults.
The results of the ANOVA F-tests showed that over all of the supermarkets in general, the amount of hours of TV watched is a relevant factor is explaining fair-trade and organic chocolate expenditure but not standard chocolate expenditure.
For Sainsbury the one way ANOVA tests were shown to be insignificant for fair trade and standard chocolate types therefore no conclusions can be drawn specifically for these. However, the number of hours of TV watched was found to be a relevant factor in explaining the organic chocolate expenditure of Sainsbury 's customers. The graphs show how the means differ. Customers who watch 1-12 hours of TV a week spend the most on organic chocolate. Those who do not watch television do not buy the chocolate at all therefore it might be advisable for Sainsbury to develop a television advertisement (to capture its target audience) promoting organic chocolate. Watching TV and eating chocolate is often done together. People often buy chocolate to eat whilst watching a film so other marketing strategies could include displaying some chocolate with the videos sold in the stores or linking them in promotions such as; rent this DVD and get a free bar of fair-trade or organic chocolate.
The objective of the study was to investigate what factors influence chocolate expenditure.
Independent sample T-tests and one-way ANOVA F-tests were the methodologies used.
Other methodologies such as linear regression could have given further indication of the relationship (how much the of the variation in expenditure was explained by the different factors).
Having kids is a relevant factor in explaining fair trade and organic chocolate expenditure in general (for all supermarkets).
Having kids is a relevant factor in explaining fair trade chocolate expenditure only for Sainsbury.
The number of TV hours watched is a relevant factor in general (for all supermarkets).
The number of TV hours watched is a relevant factor in explaining organic chocolate expenditure only for Sainsbury.
An advertising campaign directed at children promoting fair trade chocolate could be profitable for Sainsbury.
A television advertisement promoting organic chocolate could be profitable for Sainsbury.
It would be interesting to carry out further research for Sainsbury in order to build a larger profile for its chocolate consumers which will enable the supermarket to segment its market and target consumers more effectively.
Segmentation involves splitting consumers up into groups of individuals with similar needs and attitudes towards the product/service in order to target them with prices and promotions consistent with their individual needs.
Segmentation can be conducted in many different ways. This study has looked at psychographic (splitting consumers into groups based on the number of TV hours watched) and demographic aspects (age group and whether they have children).
A questionnaire could be designed to look at other demographic factors that could be explored in terms of how they affect chocolate expenditure, for example; income levels, gender, status and social class.
Behavioural factors would be valuable in terms of finding out what the consumer wants from chocolate as a product as they focus on the relationship between the product and the consumer. For example, do people purchase chocolate as a gift, a single bar for their own consumption, a multi-pack for the family, or perhaps to be used in cooking?.
How do they view chocolate? - As a treat, a luxury, or an everyday necessity? Do they buy more from the more reputable brands? - and which brand is the most popular?.
It might also be useful to look at how often it is consumed: daily, weekly or monthly.
Other ways of collecting this data besides a questionnaire include; focus groups, analysing the nectar card database, and buying data from classification systems such as Acorn.
