Vinegar is formed by aerobic bacteria oxidizing grain alcohol to acetic acid and water. More generally, vinegar can be defined as a solution composed of acetic acid (HC2H3O2), water, and, perhaps, other substances.
The objective of this experiment is to measure the total acid concentration in given samples of vinegar.
The method used to measure the total acidity of the vinegar being studied is an analytical chemistry technique called an acid-base titration. A titration mixes two solutions which contain reactants for a known chemical reaction under conditions such that: a) The point at which both reactants have been completely consumed by the known reaction can be detected (end point) b) The amount of one reactant can be calculated from the known concentration of reactant in a standard solution, the volume of standard solution used, and the balanced known chemical equation.
For an acid-base titration, the known chemical reaction in general is: and for the titration of the vinegar in this experiment the following specific reaction will be used to calculate the acetic acid content of the vinegar sample:
Sodium hydroxide will be the standard reactant solution for this titration, and acetic acid the calculated unknown reactant.
The end point in this experiment will be detected with an acid/base indicator. An acid / base indicator is a colored substance with two or more different colors depending on the value of the pH of the solution. Indicators are also very weak acids or bases and react with added acid or base if no other base or acid is present in a solution. Phenolphthalein is the indicator used in this experiment, and phenolphthalein is colorless in acid and neutral solutions but is red in basic solutions. The phenolphthalein will change color with the addition of a single drop of sodium hydroxide if no other acid (acetic acid for this experiment) is present in the phenolphthalein-sodium hydroxide solution.
We first needed to prepare and standardize the NaOH solution via titration with a primary acid standard, potassium hydrogen phthalate (KHP) 0.1M using as a colour indicator phenolphthalein.
We then had to titrate with our standardized base to determine the total acid content of our vinegar samples and express the results as acetic acid (%m/v).
Note: When determining the total acidity, we changed the volume of the sample taken from 20 ml to 25 ml. We also titrated 25 ml of the diluted sample instead of 20 ml.
Using a pH paper, we had to determine the approximate pH values of the original undiluted samples of vinegar.
Finally, we had to add a few drops of barium chloride solution to separate aliquots of the original undiluted vinegar samples in test tubes and record our observations.
We had to do the same procedure as above, adding silver nitrate solution this time.
For the calculation of the nominal concentration of the NaOH we had the following results:
Titration:
For the determination of acidity we had the following results: 1st Sample:
But the sample was diluted by 4x.
So in order to find the % w/v we should multiply w% by 4 times. 2nd Sample:
But the sample was diluted by 4x.
So in order to find the % w/v we should multiply w% by 4 times. 3rd Sample:
But the sample was diluted by 4x.
So in order to find the % w/v we should multiply w% by 4 times.
Where:
From the literature we know that the legal minimum values for the acidity of vinegar when expressed as Acetic Acid % are   4%.
From the results we obtained, we can clearly state that samples 1 and 3 generally meet the above minimum value, and sample 2 is far below the minimum requirements.
Specifically, the first (5.45%) and third (6.41%) sample values are considered very high, and this can be contributed to the method. In this method we titrate not only acetic acid but all the acids that are in the samples, so this is an error based on the method that should be taken into serious consideration when expressing the results.
As far as the second sample is concerned, the relative low value (2.96%) that is calculated can be justified by the fact that there might be mineral acids dissolved in the sample.
The literature values for pH in Vinegar are usually close to pH value ~3.
From the results we have using the pH paper, we can observe that sample number 1 and 2 are very close to that value but the value for sample 3 is way far that value. Perhaps the presence of Mineral Acids (pH ~ 1-2) in the 3 rd sample has altered this result.
We know that the test with the AgNO 3 is a test to determine the presence of Cl- and the test using the BaCl 2 is a test to determine SO 4-.
After performing these tests, we observed that the tests using BaCl 2 were all negative, something that indicates that there is no presence of SO 4- in our samples. When performing the tests using AgNO 3 we observed turbidity and precipitants in samples1 and 2, and small turbidity in the tube containing sample 2. This indicates that Cl- is present in all three samples, but in larger quantities in samples 1 & 2.
Taking all the results from all the teams that performed the same experiment, we constructed 3 diagrams (one for each sample) that shows the variation of the results related to the mean value, taking 2 SE (95%) as a measuring unit for an upper and a lower limit. , where    = standard deviation and n = sample number (in this experiment, n = 2 because we had duplicate samples).
For the first sample we had:
For the second sample we had:
For the third sample we had:
As we can see in the charts above, in the first sample, our value for the acidity of vinegar is out of the 95% confidence limits that we have set and therefore a significant error has occurred. This could be mainly due to the human factor as we observe that most of the other teams were inside these confidence limits, so it is not a problem caused by the method. Such errors should not occur and are minimized by training and exercise. As for the second and third samples, we observe that we are inside the confidence limits and in fact we are very close to the mean values.
All in all, many errors may occur. A common error is the sampling error which is partly avoided by the use of more than one sample when titrating.
Limitations due to the uncertainty of the instruments also exist but we consider them as not significant when doing our calculations.
