UHT is a continuous process which involves rapid heating to high temperatures about 140  C holding for a short period of time (1-10 seconds) and cooling rapidly to produce a sterile product .
The direct UHT process is usually carried out above 135  C and can be used for any product provided it 's pumpable e.g. custard.
It consists of 4 steps.
The product is then placed in aseptic packaging that is commercially sterile and has a shelf life of approximately 6 months .(The aseptic packaging is sterilized using 30-35% hydrogen peroxide at 70-80  C; this decomposes to give harmless oxygen and water afterwards).
Prior to milk treatment the tube is sterilized by pumping hot water at 130  C for 30 minutes .Steam / water at 140   C which is cooled before being released to the atmosphere .
Safety of the product is key.
The Z value for Clostridium botulinum, one of the most resistant pathogenic organisms is 10  C. Typically processors aim for a spoilage rate of less than 1 in 10,000. Alternative processing conditions would be 131  C for 18 sec 141  C for 1.8 sec 'Ideally the processor would want a product that does not cause a lot of fouling, and which has little sedimentation with no gelation of the product after processing'.
Preventing fouling is a major problem because of high temperatures used often result in a great deal of fouling.
Steam tables are important because they enable one to establish an equilibrium temperature - pressure where the milk is heated to the necessary temperature without it boiling since temperatures greater than 140  C are required .
Please see procedure detailed in practical bookle t.
Therefore residence time.
The UHT milk had significantly lower values of Solids non-fat which confirmed the suspicions on tasting that the milk had been watered down during processing due to failure to condense off all the steam used to heat the milk up.
This test is usually used to check for the molar concentration of solutes present in an aqueous liquid or if the milk has been 'watered down'. Milk that has been watered down has a lower value.
This is because presence of solutes depresses the freezing point.
Since this was an indirect UHT treatment there was little likelihood that some water had not been removed from the milk as is the case for Direct UHT treatment where steam is used to heat the milk which is later flash cooled removing the steam.
The raw milk must satisfy very exacting demands as regards its quality. Alcohol stability is an indirect method of testing for protein stability; since the produce is exposed to high temperatures and must be capable of being stored for a comparatively long period of time. If it is unstable it coagulates or curdles with very low concentrations of alcohol.
The UHT milk was tested to see what effect the high temperatures had on its proteins stability and hence it shelf life .
The turbidity test is used to estimate the whey protein denaturation. When all the whey protein has been denatured , for example in sterilised milk , negative turbidity is observed .
UHT is claimed to denature between 60 and 90 % of whey proteins (Should give a positive turbidity reading).
Below is a list of the samples in order of increasing whey protein denaturation . The approximate percentages were determined visually to give a clearer indication of what was observed.
Comment : Whey protein denaturation is just one indicator of chemical damage in general , Comment on turbidities from the UHT and sterilised milks.
The mean freezing point depression of milk is often quoted as -0.535  H, which is taken as an appropriate standard for estimation of added water. (Coveney L, 1993).
Raw milk gave a value of 517m  C which warrants no action according to the Code of practice for the assessment of milk quality (Joint committee (1985) Code of practice for the Assessment of milk quality) UHT milk however gave a reading of 516m  C which warrants a warning letter then a check of the premises if repeated.
The in-container sterilised product is of lower quality because the product heats and cools relatively slowly; furthermore the temperatures are limited by the internal pressure generated.
Selection of the optimum equipment , raw materials and processing conditions is a key factor in the success of any UHT treatment .
Between heating, if components of the milk are well distributed the flow through the tubes is better and may result in less fouling.
Because it is a high temperature short time process which usually results in less chemical damage to important nutrients and functional ingredients (2003, Lewis, class notes) hence the natural flavour is not compromised greatly.
The products processed at higher temperature had cooked flavour. This comes from the sulphydryl compounds in the milk.
They are packaged in aseptic containers which range from tetra packs lined with sterilized foil, plastic bottles or glass bottles in cases where the milk is processed within the glass which is its final packaging, cans and flexible pouches.
Browning, oxidation of sulphydryl groups, loss of vitamin C and lipid oxidation.
Fouling, need to clean more often the higher the processing temperatures used.
Main problem faced with UHT is that at low temperatures you are trying to attain to avoid cooked flavour , pressure goes down to compensate .A rise in temperature consequently also results in a rise in temperature.
This may be due to Insufficient processing i.e. necessary processing temperatures not being achieved or held or a combination of both.
Major cause however is post - processing contamination, where contaminants enter the product during handling before packaging i.e. In the cooling section. Defective packaging may also lead to contamination.
Enzyme inactivation.
One that does n't cause a lot of fouling which necessitates stopping to clean the machine very often.
