The aim of this essay is to present a bottom-up analysis of a five-minute sample of a natural conversation between three speakers based on the principles and techniques of the Conversation Analysis (CA) approach. The participants, one mail and two female scholars, who work at the same university, are discussing about the British educational system in a relaxed, friendly but serious tone. The main focus of the analysis will be drawn on the one-minute transcribed part, although a number of explicit references will be made for the rest part of the discussion, when necessary.
To begin with, CA approach originated from a wider intellectual group of sociologists, known as ethnomethodologists. According to Heritage (1985:21) the school of ethnomethodology is oriented towards an analysis of the order of a particular setting focusing on people 's actions rather than trying to impose a theoretical framework in which data will fit. CA approach expands this argument and applies it to everyday natural conversation. As McCarthy holds (1991:6) "In Conversational analysis, the emphasis is not upon building structural models but on the close observation of the behaviour of participants in talk and on patterns which recur over a wide range of natural data." As a result, the key concern of CA is to unveil and describe recurring strategies that people employ in order to interact successfully with one another. The goal is to explain the notions of underlying structure of interpretation and production of conversation by searching for patterns and forms of organisation. Consequently, it is clear, as Cameron maintains (2001:87) that CA is a data based form of discourse analysis. The nature of data is critical since CA approaches the analysis of interaction without a range of pre-selected ideas and issues of organisation. On the contrary, CA allows the data to reveal these underlying patterns of social interaction.
More specifically, Sacks and al (1974), cited in Eggins and Slade (1997:25), argue that CA tries to account for the fact that only one person speaks at a time and that speakers take turns while conversing. According to CA, the point at which speakership can switch is called Transition Relevance Place (TRP) and is marked by a number of grammatical, semantic and prosodic features. For instance, when a speaker lowers the pitch of his voice, then the other speakers may perceive it as a potential TRP point and a chance to grab the floor of speakership. At the same time, according to Cameron (2001:91) not all speakers are potential candidates of taking the next turn. There is some kind of hierarchy of who is going to speak which may depend on the current speaker who has the power to select the next one, by means of gazing or through nomination. Nevertheless, there are cases when the next speaker my self-select and times when none of the participants will be eager to take the floor. As a result, there is a limited toleration of simultaneous speech or silence and when it occurs, speakers regard it as a problem that has to be fixed. Last but not least, a basic concept that could be drawn from this analysis is the concept of local management. As Levinson holds (1983:300) the fact that the system of conversation is locally managed means that each utterance is shaped and constrained in the context of what comes before and after it. The course of action of a conversation is neither determined a priori nor can it be predicted in advance but it is constantly negotiated.
Despite the fact that it is impossible to find a perfect theory without shortcomings and ambiguities, the brief literature background description should be justification for the choice of CA for the analysis of the dialogue mentioned above. Apart from CA, the other major system of analysis that was developed was Discourse Analysis (DA) and it was introduced by the Birmingham school. DA 's key concept is the Initiation, Response, Feedback structure (IRF). This framework was firstly developed to describe the classroom interaction of a teaching situation. Practitioners of DA extended later this structure to the description of natural everyday conversation. As a result, they tried to regularise natural interaction by imposing this rigid framework. However, this is too simplistic for the dynamic flow of conversation. In addition, when the conversation is informal and involves more than two speakers the interaction becomes even more complex to describe. As Levinson supports (1983:294) " Conversation is not a structural product in the same way that a sentence is - it is rather the outcome of the interaction of two or more independent, goal-directed individuals, with often divergent interests." CA provides a better insight to the analysis of casual talk. The prevalent concept that conversation is locally managed as well as the fact that its structure cannot be predetermined reflect the real nature of everyday interaction.
This conversation is a natural interaction between three adult speakers, one male and two female, all native speakers of the English language and highly educated. Moreover, they are colleagues who belong to the academic staff of the same university and probably have known one another for many years. The conversation is held in a relaxed but serious tone due to the significance of the topic which is the current condition of the British educational system. As the conversation unfolds, there are many references to historical events, for example, the 1994 Education Act, as well as instances of personal narrations, for example, Leslie 's narration of her daughter 's secondary education. What 's more, there is a certain amount of shared knowledge and use of relevant terminology concerning the different kinds of schools, that for a foreigner coming from a different educational setting, would be difficult to comprehend.
Furthermore, in the course of the conversation there a number of topic shifts resulting in a series of subtopics. But all these subtopics, for example, the issue of private schools and dyslexic kids, are part of the general theme of education. According to Sacks (1971), cited in Coulthard (1977:77) "...a conversation which is progressing from one topic to another, and ...the relative frequence of marked topic introduction is some measure of the quality of the conversation." Generally speaking , we could say that there are three pivotal points of topic shift in the course of the interaction. In the beginning, the content of the talk is the comparison between grammar and comprehensive schools which shifts to the comparison between private and state schools and then moves to the final point which is the difference in the timetables between British and continental schools.
In addition, one of the main features of turn-taking in the interaction is the fact that speakers compete most of the time for floor ownership. In some points speakers are fighting to grab the floor and develop their contribution to the development of the topic. This constant negotiation of floor ownership is a feature that emphasizes the notion of local management that CA supports. As Eggins and Slade argue (1997: 27) "...turn allocation cannot be agreed in advance at the beginning of the conversation, but must be continually renegotiated at each TCU boundary.".
The transcribed part of the conversation provides an excellent illustration of the range of different strategies that people employ in order to interact effectively, according to CA approach. In the conversation, there are many instances of topic shift, smooth and unsmooth turn taking, hesitation phenomena, backchanneling behaviour, supportive overlap and agreement among participants.
The transcribed part begins with Leslie elaborating on her argument that schools tend to provide fewer extra-curricular activities. Claire follows Leslie supportively and contributes to the construction of the message. In line 14 Claire takes the floor and drifts the topic to a previous subtopic that was analysed before, that middle class parents spend a lot of money to provide their children with extra classes, signalled by the topic boundary marker "so, again...".Then, the male speaker explains his argument that schools should have a longer day so as to engage the attention of the children (l.23). He makes use of explicit references, for example the Maiden Erlegh school (l 25). Lastly, in line 28 Claire grabs the floor to provide a piece of information that the school day finishes at half past two. Thus we have a quite smooth shift of relevant subtopics as well as collaborative construction of the message.
In the conversation, there are variations in the way in which the floor of speakership moves from one speaker to the other. In the beginning, there is a high degree of uncertainty about floor ownership but this is characteristic of spontaneous conversation. Leslie unfolds her argument in a slow pace and is repeatedly interrupted by Claire in a supportive way. Moreover, in lines 19-21 there is mutual agreement between the two speakers with competition about floor ownership. Line 23 is a potential turn-taking point for the male speaker to grab the floor since both female speakers lower the pitch of their voice which signals that they have nothing more to say and they are passing the floor to someone else. In contrast to this example, line 28 is not a potential place for transition to occur because the male speaker is elaborating on his argument. However, Claire 's interruption is supportive and contributes to the construction of the message.
Since everyday conversation is spontaneous and not pre-determined, speaker turns consist of a range of hesitation phenomena from silent and filled pauses to verbal fillers such as "you know, I mean". As Stenstrom argues (1994:1) such items "have a positive impact on the smooth flow of conversation. They help the speaker to take, keep and yield the turn and to appeal for feedback." For example, there are many silent pauses and expressions as "you know" in Leslie 's speech (l 1) which indicates that she is appealing for understanding and approval. In addition, Alan 's speech (l 23-24) contains many filled pauses which signify that he is making his mind about what he has to say as he moves on.
In lines 12-13, 17-18, 21-22 we can clearly see that while the one participant is talking the other two do no remain completely silent. According to Stenstrom (1994:5) "What distinguishes backchannels from turns is that they do not involve a speaker shift. On the contrary, they acknowledge what the current speaker says and generally encourage him/her to go on." Realisations of backchanneling are usually sounds like "yeah" and "mm" which are linguistically vacant but give speakers the right for a long turn and indicate that the listener is involved and interested in what the speaker is saying.
According to CA approach, the turn allocation mechanism ensures that only one person speaks at a time. But there are instances in spontaneous speech where people take turns before the previous speaker has finished his utterance. This is either because the listener misunderstood that the speaker was finishing his speech or because he/she is eager to grab the floor and interrupt the person who is talking. However, as Cameron maintains (2001:92) "...the idea that simultaneous speech is either overlap (an honest mistake) or interruption (a hostile violation) is oversimplified..." The overlapping in lines 1-2 constitutes such an instance. While Leslie tries to find the right word Claire intervenes and completes Leslie 's utterance. The same thing applies to line 11-12. In these cases the listener is not intending to grab the floor and appear rude. On the contrary, the aim is to provide support and contribute to the construction of the message. As Fishman argues, cited in Kendall and Tannen (2001:548) it is proved that "...women performed more of the conversational support work required to sustain conversational interaction with their partners." This belief applies perfectly well in this conversation with female speakers performing most of the supportive work as well as most of the backchanneling behaviour.
A key concept in CA and a another proof of local management organisation is that of the adjacency pairs. According to Schegloff and Sacks(1974) cited in Eggins and Slade (1997:27) adjacency pairs were identified as having three characteristics: a first part and a second part which were adjacent and produced by different speakers. For instance in line 3 appendix 2 Leslie makes a question whether she is right that continental schools have a longer day than British schools. This question constrains the other speakers to come up with the piece of information requested. However, there are cases where the first part of the adjacency pair provides the listener with an alternative response. For example, invitations may be accepted or rejected. As Cameron holds (2001:97), CA practitioners developed a preference system in order to account for these alternative second parts. The preferred response is the acceptance, for example, and the dispreferred the rejection which is delivered with a certain degree of hesitation and elaboration in order to minimise the negative effect. However, as Levinson argues (1983:337) preference organisation is not limited to the level of adjacency pairs. He states (1983:337) that "...there are, for a start, kinds of turns paired less tightly than adjacency pairs, where a first part does not seem to require but rather make apt some response or second-action-chains in Pomerantz 's (1978) terminology." He explains that after an assessment another assessment is likely to follow for the other speaker. For instance, Leslie makes a judgement with which Claire agrees (l 19-21). Thus, according to Levinson, this is a kind of assessment followed by another assessment which expresses agreement. Consequently, because there is a clear preference for agreement there is neither delay or pause nor any kind of mitigation in the delivery of the second part.
Because of the fact that the turn-taking mechanism operates differently in every language, there are many teaching implications of CA, which due to the limited extent of this essay will not be analysed here. In conclusion, it is general belief that CA approach emphasized and illustrated more effectively the interactive dimension of natural conversation than any other approach. Nevertheless, as Eggins and Slade maintain (1997:44) "While CA recognised the adjacency pair (a two-turn structure) plus a different, more extended sequences, it did not propose a general theory of discourse structure of natural conversation." One could argue that the major advantage of this approach, the analysis of casual talk without the imposition of any theoretical framework became its major inadequacy. Furthermore, the major analytic category that CA proposed was the adjacency pair with a number of subcategories. However, as Coulthard argues (1977:91) "...a large proportion of utterances are not pairs and the intending analyst does not know how to handle them." Similarly, a quiet limited number of adjacency pairs were found in this conversation. Last but not least, CA developed a limited amount of techniques regarding the concept of topic organisation and topic shift. According to Heritage (1985:29) there is no adequate theory from CA to describe how people shift from one topic to another. To sum up, despite the shortcomings and the inadequate theoretical framework CA provided the most useful tools for the analysis of the structure of everyday conversation.
