1. Natural enemies of pest species can be very helpful in keeping pest populations at lower levels. The populations of aphids do not reach pest levels every year due to the present of many different natural enemies. Studies suggest that the mortality rate of Pterostichus madidus increase after Dimethoate treatment due to feeding of contaminated aphids, shown by examination of gut contents of field- trapped individuals. (Luff, 1974; Dixon & McKinlay, 1992) 2. The direct contact sub- lethal effect of Dimethoate at selected concentration to Pterostichus madidus was estimated. Dimethoate solution at appropriate concentration was applied on P. madidus. Sub- lethal effects are measured as the change in locomotion, foraging behavior, life span and fecundity. 3.Dimethoate functions by interfering the activities of Acetylcholine esterase, which is critical for the proper functioning of nervous systems of both humans and insects The accumulation of acetylcholine at nerve endings cause over-stimulation of the synapses, leading to muscle cramps fasciculation, weakness, titanic paralysis and pallor, etc. 4. Decreased in turning speed, speed, fecundity and consumption were recorded. This indicates the negative physiological effects on direct Dimethoate contact of Pterostichus madidus. 5. Integrated pest management would be the solution to minimize the chance in evolution of pest pesticide resistance.
Dimethoate, Pterostichus madidus, Sitobion avenae, carabid beetle, aphids, sub- lethal effect, organophosphate, pesticides, acetylcholine esterase, evolution of resistance.
Dimethoate (C 5H 12NO 3PS 2) is an organo- phosphate pesticide (OP). (Jafferyal. 1989) It was first introduced in 1956 and used extensively throughout the world on a large number of agricultural and horticultural crops for the control of pest such as aphids, spider mite and pea midge, etc. (Jafferyal. 1989; Mathur 1992). In addition, Dimethoate is also used as a residual wall spray in farm buildings for house flies. The action spectrum of organophosphate is very broad, it acts on wide range of organisms; animals, plants and insect. (Jafferyal. 1989). The chemical and physical properties of Dimethoate together with its effectiveness contribute to the increasingly preference over the organochlorine pesticides (e.g.: DDT) during the 1960s. Dimethoate is moderately soluble in water and highly soluble in most organic solvents. It is fairly stable in water and acid solution, but relatively unstable in alkaline solution. Dimethoate is often applied as fumigant. Actions of Dimethoate can be contact and/ or systemic, such systemic action can compensate for the poor initial coverage. It is particularly effective to aphids and other insects that suck a poisoned sap; therefore, it could be quite safe for other insect to walk on the Dimethoate contaminated plant.
Once Dimethoate absorbed following ingestion, inhalation or skin contact, it is highly toxic. (Al-Jaghbiral. 1992). Dimethoate functions by interfering the activities of Acetylcholine esterase, which is critical for the proper functioning of nervous systems of both humans and insects (Hassal 1990; Lopez-Carillo and Lopez-Cervantes 1993). Dimethoate is very potent once it is inside the body and it undergoes active phosphorylation with the enzyme acetyl cholinesterase (AchE). This cause AchE inhibition and the build up of neurotransmitter in the central nervous system. The accumulation of acetylcholine at nerve endings causes over-stimulation of the synapses. Over-stimulation of nicotinic synapses results in physiological effects such as muscle cramps fasciculation, weakness, titanic paralysis and pallor. In addition, over- stimulation of the central nervous system often leads to anxiety, restless, dizziness, confusion and ataxia, etc. Such physiological and psychological effects alter the locomotory (Jensen et al., 1997) and foraging behaviors (Dempster, 1968) of insects. Furthermore, a variety of studies suggested that Dimethoate is canerogenic and mutagenic. (Tripathy et al.) Dimethoate is biodegradable, constantly breaking down via hydrolysis. The half life of Dimethoate on plant varies amount two to five days. Degradation in soil is highly depends on the type of soil, temperature and pH.
Aphid is a generalist pest, forming colonies on many crops. Aphid feed on plant material and produce a sweet, sticky extract called honeydew which a black fungus called sooty mould sometimes colonized on. A serious infection on leaves will lower the rate of photosynthetic rate; this dramatically reduces the crop yield. (Ekesi et al.).
Ground beetles form one of the biggest groups within carabid species; they are very abundant in arable habitats in the United Kingdom. Aphids comprise a significant proportion of their diet and it is shown by examination of gut contents of field- trapped individuals. (Luff, 1974; Dixon & McKinlay, 1992) Therefore, certain carabid beetles species are considered to be important biological control agents for aphid pests in arable habitats. (Kromp, 1999; Symondson et al., 2002) Several lines of evidence of cereal aphid dislodgment from plants due to physical and biological factors have been recorded. The chance of aphid decolonization was shown to much lower in areas that own a high ground beetle density. (Winder, 1990).It is suggested that the phenomenon is due to the predation of aphids by ground beetles. Although ground beetles constantly control aphid 's population by acting as natural enemies, it is often not powerful enough to reduce the aphid 's population below the economic damage threshold. Pesticides are often used to prevent the reduction in yield and the spread of Barley Yellow Dwarf viruses.
Pterostichus madidus is one of the most common ground beetles occur in the United Kingdom, usually found under stones or logs in daytime; often in gardens. It is predatory, but also feeds on plant materials, including fruits. It is well known predator of insect pest such as aphids and slugs and it particularly plays an important role in controlling aphid 's population.( Mair, 2002; Luff, 1974; Dixon & McKinlay,1992 ) The systemic action of Dimethoate kills off aphids colonies in a very fast rate. Although the action of Dimethoate is mainly systemic, it is frequently apply as fumigant and statistics of direct contact effect on non-target organisms are worrying. There is increasing evidence that application of organophosphate insecticide reduces carabid beetle activity density and altered community composition in the crop area. (Hassan et al., 1991, 1994) The aim of this study is to investigate the direct effect of Dimethoate to Pterostichus madidus in different concentration.
Newly moulted adult of Pterostichus madidus is used for all experiments. The culture was kept at 15  1 OC long day- length (16:8), maintained with dried mixer dog food. Aphids obtained form a culture of Sitobion avaneae maintained on winter wheat (Var rialto) at 20 OC 16:8 day length.
Adult beetles were weighed using a microbalance prior to treatment. Dimethoate 40   (supplied as an emulsifiable concentrate with 400g ai/L, field rate 342g/ ha in a volume of 200L/ ha) was dissolves in water. using a pipette, a 2  l drop of Dimethoate at the appropriate concentration was applied to the abdomen of each beetle with the help of Burkard micro- applicator.
The treated beetles were placed in individual culture boxes (15  4  10cm) with dampened Kimwape   and 10 dead aphids (adults killed by freezing). Kept at 15  1 OC and long day length 16:8. Beetles were fed daily and the numbers of aphids eaten are recorded.
Twenty four hours after application, beetles were placed individually in a circular arena ( 20cm Petri dish), activity recorded for 24 hours using computerised video system Ethovision   version 2.1 (Noldus Information Technology). Then returned to culture boxes, and observed for a further 39 days. Eggs produced and aphid consumption rate, life span, turning rate and speed of beetle are recorded.
Effects of the contact toxicity in 7 levels of 2  l doses (0%, 10%,25%, 50%, 75%, 100%,125%) of organophosphate pesticide Dimethoate 40   (emulsifiable concentrate with 400g ai /l, field rate 342g/ha in a volume of 200 l/ha) against newly moulded adult of Pterostichus madidus. Kruskal- Wallis ANOVA was used to test for the significance of reduction in fecundity, lifespan, consumption rate, turning rate, speed and weight with respect to the increase of contamination of Dimethoate to Pterostichus madidus.
The effect of the increase of Dimethoate concentration contaminated to the degree in decrease fecundity was measured in terms of the number of eggs produced daily. The decrease of fecundity has proven to be significant (DF=6, H=65.79, p 0.0001) (Fig. 1.); as well as the life span, the hypothesis of the increase in contamination of Dimethoate to the decrease in life span of Pterostichus madidus is strongly favored (Fig. 2.) (DF=6, H=102.23, p 0.0001). Accompany with the life span and fecundity, the decrease of consumption rate according to the increase of Dimethoate contamination was proven to be significant (DF=6, H=76.9, p 0.0001) (Fig. 3.). Measurement of movement was record as moving speed, the decrease in moving speed against the increase in Dimethoate contamination of Pterostichus madidus was proven to be significant (DF=6, H=77.53, p 0.0001) (Fig. 4). The response of Pterostichus madidus to its prey, the turning rate, decrease significantly with increase Dimethoate doses (DF=6, H=101.1, p 0.0001) (Fig.5). The weight of Pterostichus madidus prior to the experiment were very even (DF=6, H=0.26, p=1.000) (Fig. 6).
The hypothesis that direct contact of Dimethoate to Pterostichus madidus contributes to the negative physiological effect appeared to be confirmed. The decrease in fecundity, lifespan, consumption rate, turning rate and speed in proportion to the degree of Dimethoate contamination of P. madidus was very significant. In insect, cholinergic synapses are confined in the central nervous system. Dimethoate metabolise acetylcholine esterase by oxidative desulfuration, this irreversible reaction denatured the active site of the enzyme esterase causing the accumulation of acetylcholine at the synapses, resulting in intoxication of the insect. Sympthoms include restlessness, hyperexcitability, tremors, paralysis, etc. Indication of those symptoms explains the decrease speed and turning rate of P. madidus. Accumulation of acetylcholine at nerve ending keeps the sodium channel open, this continuous depolarization leads to paralysis of the beetle, causing a delay response to the prey, explaining the reduction in consumption rate. All the factors that mention above contributes to the decrease in energy uptake of the beetle, this explains the reduction in fecundity and life span. Although insects normally put most effort in producing offspring, the unexpected waste of energy in paralysis dramatically reduce the proportion of energy spend on reproduction. In addition, the weights of beetle prior to experiment are very even and therefore we could predict that beetles under very similar conditions, such as equal fitness.
Dimethoate is a broad septum insecticide; it is usually very effective against insects and animals. Consequently, the side effect of Dimethoate treatment to non- target organism would be very high. It is well demonstrated in this study that Dimethoate induce a negative physiological effect on the ground beetle Pterostichus madidus. Due to the fact that ground beetle make up the largest proportion of Coleoptera, we could predict that other Coleoptera spp generally response to Dimethoate in a similar way. Coleoptera is the most abundant predatory species in the class Insecta, frequently acting as natural enemies of pest such as aphids and snails. Killing of natural enemies will interrupt the natural balance between pest and its natural enemies, which in turn increase the chance of pest out break. In addition, Dimethoate residual produces a long term effect spreading though the food chain.
Dimethoate is generally moderately to highly toxic to honey bees. The oral LD50 for honey-bee (Apis mellifera L) is between 93- 150ng per bee (Jaycox, 1964); and the contact LD50 is 98-120ng per bee. Besides, honey bee seems do not have a mechanism to repel foraging Dimethoate contaminated material. The self- limiting dose for foraging range form 20-25 times of the lethal oral dose. Around 5% of the dose is absorbed by the bee and 95% will carry on passing on to the colony i.e.: to the hive. (Waller et al., 1979) This chain reaction dramatically increases the spreading rate of Dimethoate thought tout honey bees population. Since the LD50 of honey bee is pretty high, Dimethoate residual on plants often contributes to the high bee mortality. Nectar form plants sprayed with 0.1% Dimethoate is lethal for honey bees within 2- 3 days. (Barker et al., 1980) Therefore, the spraying of Dimethoate to flowering plants or near flowering plants are not recommended.
Dimethoate is moderately to highly toxic to birds. This is because birds do not metabolize Dimethoate as fast as other organism do, which cause the high toxicity in birds. Birds generally have a low LD 50. It has been reported that the acute oral LD 50 values are 41.7 to 63.5 mg/kg in mallards and 20.0 mg/kg in pheasants. (Smithal. 1993).
Dimethoate contaminated grass and water contribute to pesticide poisoning in farm animals. The reported actual oral LD50 for house, sheep and cattle are  50, 80 and 70 mg/ kg body weight. (Jacksonal. 1960, Hewittal. 1958) Symptoms of intoxication include salivation, larchrymation, transitory diarrhoea, rhinitis and anorexia, which all directly or indirectly related to the decrease in acetylcholine esterase activities. .
Dimethoate is moderately toxic to fish, with reported LC50 values of 6.2 mg/L in rainbow trout, and 6.0 mg/L in bluegill sunfish .It is more toxic to aquatic invertebrate species such as stoneflies and scuds.
Dimethoate is very volatile. It has the volatility of 2.207mg/m 3 and this imply the popularity of aeriform Dimethoate. It has been recorded that Dimethoate could travel to over 1000m away form the sprayed area. The concentration on the day of spraying ranged from 0.061 to 0.142mg/m 2 form 300 meters away, decreased during the next four days to 0.004 to -0.014mg/m 2. (Madzhidoz, 1970. The half- life of Dimethoate in soil is approximately twenty days, highly depends on the temperature, pH, as well as the type of soil (i.e.: the microbes' composition of the soil). It is reported that the micro organisms in soil played little role in the degradation of Dimethoate. Due to the fact that Dimethoate is very soluble in water and organic solvents, Dimethoate in soil often leaks. It is often washed down to the freshwater ponds or river steams. Because Dimethoate is a board- spectrum insecticide, it is able to affect the aquatic organisms as well as other animals that use the water source, for example: goat, cattle, etc.
Dimethoate resistances.
Evolution of resistant is the main difficulty in the design and application of pesticides. Dimethoate was first introduced in 1956. The first Dimethoate resistant organism reported was in 1965, Panonychus ulmi, the European red mite. (Dicker 1965) Soon after that, large amount of resistant in aphids and mites are reported. The evolution of resistance falls into three methodologies: 1) increased capacity to detoxify the pesticide once it has entered the pest 's body; 2) a decreased sensitivity of the target site that the pesticide acts upon; 3) a decreased penetration of the pesticide through the cuticle, or sequestration of the pesticide within the organism. The single resistance mechanism can occasionally provide defense against a different pesticides, which is known as cross- resistance. Further decrease the range of pesticide available of individual pest. In addition, it can be predicted that organism have relatively short life cycle have a potential for evolving resistance. The cross- link of chromosome as well as mutation could give rise to the evolution of resistant gene. In addition, the spread of gene that could enhance survival is usually very fast in asexually reproduce organism such as aphids. As a result, Dimethoate is no longer a recommend pesticide for aphids, reported in the 2001 Cotton Insect Control Guide.
Implementation failure of pesticide could speed up the evolution of resistance. Dimethoate spraying treatment should only take place in late spring or summer when aphids are first seen in crops. It is often that farmers do not follow the guidelines for pesticides application. It is very common for farmers to spray more that recommended. Also, farmer would spray even the pest are not seen to ensure their crops are free from pest. In the consequence of these, spraying pesticide would induce toxicity to non- target organisms. Moreover, the application of pesticides needs to be well organized. The outbreaks of pest are likely to happen in areas that pesticide application is not well controlled. Due to the fact that farmer tend to spray more pesticides more than needed, it is usually that case that farmers end up killing non- target organisms as well as the natural enemies of the target pest. Numbers of pest that are more tolerant to the pesticide will survive and migrate to areas near by. Pest would quickly colonies due to the lack of nature enemies and out break of pest frequently happens.
It has been proved that the direct contact of Dimethoate to Pterostichus madidus contributes to various negative physiological effects such as decrease in fecundity, life span, consumption rate, etc. However, the trend relating the turning rate and speed, to fecundity, life span and consumption rate is not very clear. The turning rate and speed of the P. madidus remained relatively constant during the concentration 0 to 35% Dimethoate 40  , but there seems to be a decrease in fecundity, life span and consumption rate. There might be some other factors or mechanisms rather than turning speed and speed, affecting fecundity, consumption rate as well as the life span of P. madidus. Working on the effect of Dimethoate toxicity at low concentration will give more explanation in the Dimethoate residual effects to organism.
The effect of Dimethoate at low concentration to P. madidus varies in a much bigger extant than the high concentration Dimethoate. This shows that the toxicity of Dimethoate become more acute to P. madidus in high concentration. At the 100% field concentration Dimethoate 40  , the fairly much of the beetle were still alive, whereas at concentration 125% Dimethoate 40  , life span, fecundity and consumption rate of beetle are astonishingly low.
Combination and integration of chemical and biological controls which known as Integrated Pest Management (IPM) could be the current solution to these problems. Firstly, monitoring techniques should be used to provide a justification where a pesticide treatment is necessary. Secondly, replace pesticide by biological control. Thirdly, the system redesign is necessary; area-wide management schemes can greatly increase the effectiveness of pesticides as well as preventing evolution of resistances.
Acknowledgements.
Thank you for M. D. E. Fellows for comments and statistical help.
