Manydown estate is situated to the north west of Basingstoke and takes up 5000 acres of land around the area. It has cattle, pigs, chickens, sheep and many different types of arable crops. Part of Manydown 's mission statement is "to supply quality farm produce...care for our staff, our animals, the environment, soils and building...maintain a long term future..." This really sums up the beliefs of Manydown and their ethos of the estate and farming in general. The farm has many different enterprises which all contribute towards profitability.
Manydown has a commercial beef herd and a herd of pedigree Aberdeen Angus cows. The commercial herd consists of 180 suckled cows, all homebred, but they are hoping to increase it to 220 cows. A "criss cross breeding programme based around the original Hereford Friesian cow and a Saler bull" has been operated for the last 10 years. Aberdeen Angus is seen as a 'quality beef' by the public and so Manydown started to produce it and now has a pedigree Aberdeen Angus herd. They received 17 cows in 2001 from Nightingale in Worcester. Manydown now have their first calves and stand in good stead for the future. The future is important at Manydown and they wish to continue breeding quality bulls and heifers in order to maintain supply for the breeding of the commercial herd.
There is a spring and an autumn herd: the spring herd calve in mid March and the autumn herd, in September. The autumn herd is then yarded through the winter and the spring herd is put outside to graze. However, it is extremely costly having the cows and calves inside, so financially grazing is the better option. By having the cows inside, they need to be protected against diseases and warble fly. When grazing, the grass needs to be a certain height in order for the cows to graze efficiently. The calves will find it difficult to consume grass so hard feed is essential when they are turned out. All cattle feed is produced at Manydown except cracker feed which is pellets of ryvita and is supplied by Countrywide.
The beef industry has increased recently and has a promising future ahead. People are starting to realise how beef is of good quality and can provide variable nutrition and high proportions of protein. Developments have been made in beef production systems so that the end result is an increase in liveweight gain. However, when a farmer chooses which system for production to use, many factors will determine his decision. These maybe financial resources like cash flow, physical resources like the area and quality of the grassland, the date of birth of calves: whether they are autumn or spring and finally the type of cattle: pure diary, dual purpose or beef, or crosses. (Soffe, R.J.).
The factors above will influence the type of production. At Manydown, the physical resources are whether to graze or house the herd, but financial restrictions will affect this. Growth is extremely important for the development of the cow and its liveweight will increase as growth does. The muscle, bone and fat will develop and the rate of growth can be controlled by the breed, the type of nourishment and the sex.
Above is a drawing of a cow and the parts of the body highlighted are those that need to be looked at in order to see what proportion is carcass fat. Too much fat has to be removed and takes time, so selecting the correct weight of the animal and the fat cover is vital. At Manydown, the Aberdeen Angus is killed at a weight between 620-630kg, which is a reasonably good size and provides a long loin which produces good quality cuts of meat. In the Manydown Farm Shop there is a wide range of meats, pies, bacon and sausages. It started in 1994 and now is very popular with the locals and surrounding areas. The Farm Shop has won many awards; the most recent was the Hampshire Meat Producer/Retailer of the Year in 2004. All the meat is slaughtered in an abattoir in Farnborough and then the carcasses go back to mature for 3 weeks at Manydown. They are hung for tenderness and this gives quality of the meat. Compared to supermarkets such as Tesco, where by the time the animal is killed, sent to an abattoir and put on the shelf it can be less than a week. That is why people are starting to prefer the freshness, the quality of meat and customer service at independent butchers or Farm shops. Customer relations are very important at Manydown because they want to provide a good service and show they care about their animals, the environment and the community.
Manydown also has 800 ewes which are a mixture of Dorset ewes and North Country Mules crossed with Hampshire rams. The ewes are grazed in parkland or permanent pasture. They lamb four times a year: Christmas, Late February, April and May. Nutrition comes from a winter forage of stubble turnips and concentrates and pellets are also used for lambs, which are then weaned at 4 months. Free range chickens are a recent occurrence and they are free to roam in an enclosed area (away from any danger.) They are fed GM free foods and are slaughtered at Manydown. Manydown has an old fashioned rare breed which is the large black pig. They are extremely easy to manage and produce good quality meat. Finally, Manydown grows oil seed rape, wheat, barley, beans, linseed, herbage seed, poppies and silage maize. Manydown has many conservation systems such as beetle banks and hedge trimming. There are many butterflies, rare plants and animals roaming these areas. The labour force is enthusiastic, skilled, loyal and motivated. There are 8 employees in total who work in all different areas of the farm. They are all very flexible and meetings are held to encourage teamwork and negotiate objectives.
In conclusion, Manydown has a lot to offer for the community, wildlife, its workforce and environment. It takes into account many areas and issues that are seen to be very important today. The beef cattle is one of the main enterprises and from visiting the farm, one can really begin to understand how vital they are to the business. The Farm shop has flourished, the Aberdeen Angus is proving to be popular as ever and breeding is benefiting the estate too. Overall, Manydown has many different things to offer and for the future it looks to succeed and grow even more.
