Second language acquisition is a thorougly investigated field and one attracting the interest of linguists over the years. The SLA theories that have been developed can be grouped into two major sets: a) those that "give primary importance to the learners' innate characteristics" (Lighbrown & Spada, 1999, p. 31) such as Constructivism and Innatism and b) those which "emphasize the essential role of the environment in shaping language learning" (Lightbrown & Spada, 1999, p. 31) such as Cognitivism and Behaviorism. However, in the limited space provided, this essay examines how Cognitivism, Behaviorism and Constructivism view the role of L1, input and output in SLA and analyzes how these key issues explain certain features of my learning of Persian such as the course-book design, grammar and vocabulary.
One of the main theories interested in the role of L1 is Cognitivism. According to Brown (2000), "cognitive psychologists (...) sought to discover underlying motivations and deeper structures of human behavior by using a rational approach (p. 10). For them, L1 plays a crucial role in L2 acquisition (Gass & Selinker, 2001, p. 118). However, its influence is mediated by several other factors such as "a) a learner 's psychotypology, how a learner organizes his or her NL, b) perception of NL-TL distance, and c) actual knowledge of the TL" (Gass & Selinker, 2001, p. 131). So learners will decide upon transferring certain features to the TL or not being based on the actual closeness of the two languages.
Another theory focusing on the environment 's role is Behaviorism and within it Contrastive Analysis which tries to explain the relationship between L1 and L2. Thus, "individuals tend to transfer the forms and meanings (...) of their native language (...) to the foreign language" (cited in Gass & Selinker, 2001, p. 65). This transfer of habits from L1 to L2 can take three different forms: a) negative transfer, b) positive transfer, and c) avoidance, where learners avoid the use of certain forms that are not part of their L1. So, "those elements that are similar to the (learner 's) native language will be simple for him, and those areas that are different will be difficult" (quoted in Johnson, 2001, p. 60). Therefore, L1 is seen as the main source of learner error and as a barrier to L2 acquisition.
On the contrary, a theory that is developed as "an alternative to CA (...) [is] creative construction theory" (Johnson, 2001, p. 67). Its supporters believe that L1 influence is very indirect and difficult to establish. They do not see errors as a result of L1 transfer but as developmental and thus as representing learner 's effort to practice internalized rules (Johnson, 20001, p. 68). They also claim that "children learning a second language use a creative construction process, just as they do in their first language" (Brown, 2000, p. 69). Finally, learners are seen as capable of forming hypotheses about L2 on the basis of "universal innate mechanisms" (Gass & Selinker, 2001, p. 105) and not on L1 basis.
Before proceeding to the analysis of L1 in relation to my learning experience it is necessary to clarify the context of this learning situation. As part of a module called "second language teaching and learning" in my postgraduate studies I tried to learn a limited amount of conversational Persian, with associated grammar and vocabulary. I used the course-book "Colloquial Persian" with an accompanying tape and I covered the first six lessons of the course from mid October till December 9 2005. While working on the lessons, I recorded my learning experience in a diary.
When learning Persian I had certain expectations. Firstly, I expected that some of the theoretical aspects about the role of L1 would apply to my learning experience whereas others not. Secondly, I expected to find slightly different syntax and grammatical rules from Greek (my L1). Thirdly, I expected to see completely different sounds and a new pronunciation system.
In fact, some of my initial expectations were confirmed. Specifically, Contrastive Analysis predicted that areas of similarity between L1 and L2 would be easily acquired. Indeed, I had no problem learning the Persian pronoun system since like in Greek it makes a similar distinction between second person singular and second person plural (esi- eseis in Greek, to som   in Persian). Moreover, the adjectives in Persian are pluralized (xub- xuban = good) and so are in Greek (kalos - kaloi =good). Last but not least, most of Ancient Greek verbs form their tenses by adding a prefix to the stem (feugo-efiga = leave-left). Similarly, the Present Tense of Persian verb "to know" = "dunestan" is formed by the addition of a prefix (mi + dun + am = I know). All these similarities confirmed what CA claims about positive transfer.
Also its claims about negative transfer were partly verified as certain elements that were different from L1 caused me difficulty and led me to the production of errors. Specifically, one area of difficulty based on my expectations was the acquisition of the Persian pronunciation system. Actually, I made many mistakes by transferring L1 sounds to L2 system. For example, I kept on mispronouncing the long vowel /    / in "sal  m" as Greek lacks long vowels. I also made many mistakes in words with /g, h, q/ sounds as these are not part of the Greek pronunciation system.
In addition, the rule for adjective-noun combinations in Persian caused me problems. In Persian adjectives follow the nouns (eg. film-e-xub) whereas in Greek they precede them (eg oraia tainia=good film). As a result, I would often misplace the adjectives transferring the L1 rule into Persian. Furthermore, I made many mistakes when learning the numbers. Persian numbers from 21 onwards are formed by adding 'o' = 'and' between numbers, whereas in Greek all numbers form one word e.g. "21 =   kosiena". So instead of saying 'bist o yek'= 21, I kept on saying 'yekbist'.
However as it was expected, not all my difficulties were predicted by contrastive analysis. For example, the rule for the construction of the plural of nouns, although similar to Greek, confused me as I thought that Persian had different endings for animate and inanimate nouns. Yet, the only distinction that Persian makes is when animate nouns are used in formal contexts where suffix /   n/ is added instead of the suffix /h  /. So the errors I made by applying different endings to animate and inanimate nouns were developmental and had nothing to do with L1 influence.
Furthermore, "transfer errors do not always occur when they are predicted to occur" (Ellis, 1997, p. 52). For example, although prepositions were not similar to any prepositions in my native language, yet I had no problem learning them by employing certain strategies. Also, definite articles in Persian follow the direct objects eg. "s  ndevic r  " = "the sandwich" whereas in Greek they precede them. However, I had no difficulty internalizing the rule because "when something in the L2 is very different from the L1, there is a 'novelty effect' " (cited in Gass & Selinker, 2001, p. 126).
In conclusion, I believe that the closeness or distance of L1 and L2 can lead to positive or negative transfer irrespectively. In my opinion, L1 knowledge should not be treated as a barrier as not all errors are connected to it. On the contrary, it is one of the key issues that theories of SLA have to address apart from the role of input and output that will be now analyzed.
Another element that gives us insight to SLA besides the role of L1 is the role of input. According to Ellis (1997), "input (...) is the samples of language to which a learner is exposed" (p. 5). Behaviorism, developed in 1950-60 's views input as a kind of stimulus learners have to respond to. As Lightbrown & Spada (1999) suggest, "learners receive linguistic input from speakers in the environment and they form 'associations' between words and objects or events" (p. 35). Teachers then reinforce learners' production with corrective feedback on their errors. Every lesson is organized around a dialogue followed by drilling activities on the structures initiated in it (Ellis, 1997, pp. 129-30). Thus learners have to memorize sentence-length grammar, vocabulary and pronunciation. Dialogues offer comprehensible input but drilling does not invite free conversation. In conclusion, this method does not really provide adequate input for L2 acquisition.
Cognitivism, being a more recent theory of SLA and one developed by the work of psychologists and psycholinguists addresses the role of input differently. As McLaughlin (1987) states, "second- language learning is viewed as the acquisition of a complex cognitive skill" (p. 133). Cognitivists who have introduced the notion of 'enhanced input' claim that humans have two types of memory: a working memory and a long-term memory. So input can pass from the working memory to the long-term one through rehearsal and associations. In addition, "noticing (...) is necessary and sufficient for converting input into intake" (cited in Long, 1996, p. 426). Finally, "enhanced L2 input (...) makes subtle L2 features more salient for learners, [and] (...) [helps] learners identify which forms can occur in the L2 and which cannot" (cited in Pica, 1994, p. 502).
Creative Construction Theory on the other hand, views input as a source. As Pica (1994) suggests, "exposure to L2 input is not sufficient for learners to be able to access and internalize the L2 rules, forms, and features" (p. 500). According to Krashen (1982), "we acquire by understanding language that contains structure a bit beyond our current level of competence (i + 1)" (p. 21). In this case, our knowledge of L1, of the world and the environment helps us towards it. But what happens if the message is not picked up by the learner? If this is so, then acquisition will not occur (Krashen, 1982, p. 63). So, his Input Hypothesis does not seem completely accurate either. The optimal conditions for input have not yet been met and so it is worthwhile considering what other theorists of Creative Construction theory (who have slightly different ideas about input) claim.
As Lightbrown & Spada (1999) support, "some interactionist theorists (...) have argued that much second language acquisition takes place through conversational interaction" (p. 43). So comprehensible input is not the only prerequisite for acquisition to occur (Ellis, 1999, p. 112; Long, 1996, p. 423). Learners, as is very often the case, understand the input but do not acquire it. So what these linguists have proposed instead is the internationally modified input. According to Lightbrown & Spada (1999), "modified input (...) is sometimes called foreigner talk or teacher talk" (p. 34). Therefore, teachers do not just simplify input but elaborate on it, paraphrase it and add further contextual cues to make it comprehensible. Learners interact with each other and gradually develop fluency by constantly negotiating for meaning.
The previous section provided a brief literary review of the role of input in SLA. This part however, refers to the relation between the input I got and my learning of Persian. To start with, the input from my Persian course, based on Grammar Translation, had no relation to any current method. Every chapter started with a dialogue which included the English translation below it. Vocabulary was presented in lists of isolated words (English - Persian) and exercises aiming at immediate production were given for practice. For example, a common type of activity was "Can you say these in Persian?". However, as Krashen (1982) claims, "speaking fluency cannot be taught directly" (p. 22). Also, grammar points were introduced with a minimum explanation and exercises on speaking and writing immediately followed. At the end of each chapter there was always a comprehension activity for practice of writing, after listening to the dialogue in the tape.
Moreover, as Johnson (2001) maintains, "the most obvious characteristic [of CA] (...) is the lack of authenticity" (p. 165).Thus, the course-book design was not helpful at all as each chapter provided too much information that made acquisition extremely difficult. Furthermore, the comprehension activities did not help me to pronounce the Persian words correctly or even remember them as the tapes went too fast and I had not time to listen to them. Although the dialogues were good introductory activities yet they included many unknown and formulaic words and I was not able to understand them without looking at the translation. I also found rather hard to memorize vocabulary while keeping pronunciation alive in memory. Moreover, the grammatical activities were very few and I had to create my own in order to practice the new grammar points. In general, the book did not provide practice in all four skills, lacked an adequate number of activities and was not L1 supported.
Overall, I felt I had been given a book that could not really offer me what I wanted and therefore I had to struggle and work things out myself. At that point I realized what kind of input I lacked and I would like to be given. Firstly, I needed a good course-book accompanied by tapes, a companion and a grammar book. In addition, I wanted a teacher to help me learn the language by providing feedback and explaining difficult points. Realia and audiovisual material would definitely be helpful in grammar and vocabulary teaching. Drilling, repetition and interaction with other students would increase my fluency. According to Krashen (1982), "natural, communicative (...) input has (...) real advantages" (p. 25) On the whole, a variety of different types of input and practice of all 4 skills would help me learn Persian provided that the teacher knew my needs very well and was able to modify the materials according to them.
In conclusion, I believe that there is no best way of acquiring input as people have different learning styles. However, one can easily tell the weaknesses of certain types of input such as the one provided in Grammar Translation method. In general, teachers must find ways to know their learners' learning styles and adjust their way of teaching to them. Only then will input truly facilitate learning.
Up to this point the essay has analyzed the role of L1 and input in SLA. However, there is one final aspect that needs to be examined and this is the role of output. To begin with, Behaviorism gave great emphasis on learners' immediate production. According to Gass & Selinker (2001), "output has traditionally been viewed as a way of practicing what has previously been learned" (p. 277). So learners form habits when they respond to stimuli in the environment by imitation, drilling and repetition. The focus is not on meaning but on pattern practice and "the goal is the memorization of the dialogue" (Krashen, 1982, p. 131). However, this kind of output does not promote acquisition but just the learning of desired responses.
According to McLaughlin (1987), "second-language learning (...) involves the gradual integration of sub-skills as controlled processes initially predominate and then become automatic" (p. 139). So the learner is able to produce language when he converts " 'knowledge about' into 'knowledge how to'; [when] the knowledge, in other words, becomes proceduralized or automatized" (Johnson, 2001, p. 108). In addition, repetition, memorization and creation of associations are some of the learning strategies that allow knowledge to pass into the long-term memory and thus become part of the learner 's interlanguage. Therefore, only in performance and production can one achieve acquisition.
Conclusively and before proceeding to the analysis of output in relation to my learning experience it is worthwhile looking at what Constructivist theory believes about its role. Creative Construction Theory looks at output from two different perspectives. The first view considers output as the product of the acquired system. According to Krashen (1982), "we acquire spoken fluency not by practicing talking but by understanding input, by listening and reading" (p. 60). So understanding of message is needed for the acquisition of L2 forms and structures (Pica, 1994, p. 500). Therefore, what carries primary importance is not the learners' output but their exposure to comprehensible input.
However, other constructivists attribute a more significant role to output. For them, "comprehensible output refers to the need for a learner to be 'pushed toward the delivery of a message that is not only conveyed, but that is conveyed precisely, coherently, and appropriately" (quoted in Gass & Selinker, 2001, p. 278). In other words, output is not merely seen as the result of the acquired system but as a necessary condition for L2 mastery. In addition, it can raise learners' awareness of their errors and gaps in their learning (Ellis, 1997, p. 49). So when learners speak or write they are not only able to interpret meaning but they also manage to process its syntactic structure. Finally, attention and comprehension of form in L2 input plays a more significant role in SLA than was considered (Pica, 1994, p. 501).
Personally I consider output as a useful tool for retention, motivation and mastery of L2. Teachers should always emphasize the role of input in relation to output that learners need to produce. Mere repetition and memorization of forms and meanings should not be the goal but rather the very first stage in achieving fluency in all four skills. Comprehension, practice, modification, correction, reinforcement, motivation, teacher instruction and application of the correct learning strategies can then make someone a competent user of language. Finally, learners should not be pushed into immediate production nor should they be left with too much time before speaking.
For me fluency in oral production is indeed a very high and difficult target yet one of the most important. Knowledge of rules and words alone does not help me towards production. What I need is practice, talking to myself, to my fellow students, to the teacher and to native speakers. Besides, according to Krashen (1982), "output aids learning because it provides a domain for error correction" (p. 61). So I believe that this practice needs to be an integral part of every lesson in SL, even of the very early ones. Gradually, little by little and with the teacher 's help everybody can become a fluent speaker and thus master an L2.
However, when these conditions do not apply, acquisition does not occur; and this can be confirmed by my attempt to learn Persian. As the conditions were not ideal (lack of teacher, lack of a real classroom situation, lack of authentic material) the initial motivation I had in learning a new language and the strategies I employed in order to achieve this goal did not help me towards it. The language (spoken and written) I produced was just mere repetition of certain formulaic expressions such as  'sal  m',  'sob(h) bexeir' and other types of greetings and expressions of introducing myself and asking about one 's health. Unfortunately I was not able to form a complete sentence without looking at the dialogue; and as more and more elements were introduced, my performance kept on deteriorating as I could not catch up with the material.
The same disappointing results were brought in surface after speaking with a native speaker of Persian. Although I had made a good revision of all the chapters, I had written down certain expressions and practiced them with my flat-mates the previous day I was only able to use the easiest expressions I had learnt in the very first lessons. What is more, she spoke rather fast and this did not help me understand everything. I felt very anxious when she asked me whether I had any brothers. The previous night I had learned the expression ("I have two brothers who are older than me"= "do bar  dari, mardi az man d  ri") but she did not understand it and so she asked me if they were younger or older than me. However as I did not know these adjectives I was not able to say anything and silence prevailed for some seconds. In conclusion, now that I flick through the pages again and try to do the activities I face even more problems, as I have forgotten most of it. So I think that the secret of success is constant contact and practice.
To conclude, this paper has examined the role that L1, input and output play in theories of SLA and has shown how these elements can explain certain features of my learning of Persian. Generally, the acquisition of a second language is a very complex issue and its discussion includes a lot of parameters. In particular, some of these parameters such as the role of instruction, motivation, aptitude and learning strategies were not examined in the essay and thus constitute part of its limitations. Besides, reference was made only to some theories of SLA and not to others which is another limitation of the analysis. However, apart from these limitations the essay provides a good understanding of second language learning. This understanding according to Brown (2000), "will determine your teaching style, your approach, methods, and classroom techniques" (p. 7).
