The pursuit of justice is a crucial theme in Greek tragedy. It was a very topical subject at the time these plays were written, in fifth century Athens, because democracy was being established and with it a new form of justice was coming in to place. But the justice that is sought is not always the right course of action. Often the hero of the play starts off seeking justice, but blindly goes to his doom because he pursued what he thought was justice too far. The three principle plays that I shall study in this essay to examine the pursuit of justice are Sophocles' Antigone, Euripides' Hecabe, and Aeschylus' The Eumenides. I have chosen these plays because one deals with the pursuit of justice by many people, and their conflicting views, one with the pursuit of justice by just one person, and the third deals with the very first trial.
In the Hecabe, the main character, Hecabe, is seeking justice through reciprocity. Reciprocity to the Greeks was a form of justice, because they believed that you had to avenge your family members if they were killed by killing whoever killed them. Hecabe wants to avenge the murder of her son Polydorus, who at the start of the Trojan War had been sent away with a large amount of money, to live with the King of Thebes, Polymestor. Polymestor, out of sheer greed, killed Polydorus and threw his body into the sea, unburied. Hecabe discovers this and is determined to have her revenge on the King. She lures him in to her tent and blinds him, while at the same time the chorus of Trojan women kill Polymestor 's two children. As Meridor says in his article, the events bear similarities to the Athenian justice system of the time, as 'Hecuba, far from craving personal revenge on Polymestor, expects Agamemnon to act on behalf on justice as well as on her own behalf' (Meridor 1978: 30). And so what starts off as simple reciprocity ends in a terrible act involving the murder of innocent children. Hecabe 's struggle for justice goes too far, as is common in Greek tragedies, and the result is her own downfall. Polymestor predicts her death saying that she will jump off the masthead of the Greek ship and: 'turn into a bitch with fiery eyes' (Euripides, Hecabe, l. 1265). This sequence of events is similar to what happens to Creon in Antigone. He is determined to kill Antigone for disobeying his orders and burying the boy of her brother. In the process of doing this, his son Haemon kills himself because he was betrothed to Antigone, and on hearing that her son is dead, Creon 's wife also kills herself. These are both classic examples of how tragedy evolves from a case of justice taken too far, and gone wrong. The form of tragedy dictates that the hero has to determinedly stick to their idea of what justice is, until it is too late and they realise that what they thought was justice, was not. An example of this is Oedipus, in Sophocles' Oedipus the King. It is ironic as he condemns whoever murdered Laius to death so vehemently without realising that it could be him 'I curse myself as well... if by any chance he proves to be an intimate of our house... may the curse I just called down on him strike me!' (Sophocles, Oedipus the King, l. 284-7). All these examples illustrate how in Greek tragedy the hero starts off on a pursuit of justice but through a conscious decision of that hero, the justice goes to far and brings about their own doom.
Creon is not the only character in the Antigone who pursues justice. Antigone 's very actions that land in such trouble with Creon were done because she wanted justice. It is a different kind though to what Creon is after. Antigone buries her brother, even though it is against the law, because she is defending the rights of the family to bury their relations, and the proper treatment of the dead: 'No, he (Creon) has no right to keep me from my own' (Sophocles, Antigone, l. 58-9). She fights for the justice of civilisation, rather than the personal glory and respect that Creon is so desperate for. He does what he does and condemns her to death because he is determined to stick to his idea of justice, disregarding all of Tiresias' advice, and he does not want to appear a weak king, or man: 'I am not the man now: she is the man if this victory goes to her and she goes free.' (Sophocles, Antigone, l. 541-20). Antigone does not care about how her actions make her look to other people, only that her brother gets the right and proper burial that the Greeks believed was so important: 'He is my brother... No one will ever convict me for a traitor.' (Sophocles, Antigone, l. 55-7).
In some ways is can be said that Haemon is also seeking justice in the play. He disagrees with his father 's single mindedness and loves Antigone. He argues with Creon because he wants justice for Antigone: 'I see my father offending justice- wrong.' (Sophocles, Antigone, l.833). He accuses of Creon of disobeying the gods for not allowing the body of Polynices to be buried. When the body of Polynices is first discovered buried, the chorus suggest to Creon that maybe the gods did it: 'could this possibly be the work of the gods?' (Sophocles, Antigone, l. 316). This angers Creon greatly, as does Haemon 's later accusation.
In the Hecabe, it is really only Hecabe who is pursuing any sort of justice. She is determined that justice be done to Polymestor in revenge for her son 's death. Also she wants to prevent the killing of Polyxena as she thinks it is unjust. She appeals to Odysseus to spare Polyxena 's life. She is honourable, and reminds him of when he came into Troy and, even though she knew who he was, she still spared his life. Se supplicates him and begs him: 'Then at least kill me together with my daughter!' (Euripides, Hecabe, l. 391). But despite her pleading Odysseus remains hardened, and in a moment of irony it is Polyxena who reminds her mother that she still has a son living, Polydorus. Hecabe replies to this: 'Yes, if he is alive; but I have doubts, so completely has good fortune abandoned me.' (Euripides, Hecabe, l. 428-9). Hecabe 's argument for justice is perfectly honourable and persuasive and yet is has no effect on Odysseus. I think this says a lot about the justice system that was being brought in in fifth century Athens. It is Euripides' way of saying that the system of fair trial where the accused made a speech to acquit themselves is actually not going to work, as the jury, as Odysseus has, may have already made up their minds.
When Hecabe is pleading with Agamemnon to acquit her of the crime of killing Polymestor 's children and blinding him, she uses another type of persuasion. She argues that someone should not be allowed to win his case just because he can speak persuasively, but that it should be his actions that condemn him: 'if a man 's actions are criminal, his arguments in turn should be unsound, and never should he be allowed to make a good case out of what is wrong.' (Euripides, Hecabe, l. 1189-91). I think this again is Euripides challenging the law courts of Athens, and saying that their system is unjust. She also appeals to his morals; he sacrificed his own daughter, Iphigenia, and so should know how hard it was for her to see the Greeks do the same to Polyxena, but none of this works. Hecabe argues for justice but is not given it. But she manages to sway Agamemnon with one thing: she uses his taking her daughter Cassandra as a concubine, something which she was always so against. She argues that as a result of this relationship, she is now family to Agamemnon. It is the lowest she can stoop but by now she is desperate, and it works. Agamemnon condemns Polymestor saying: 'Since you could being yourself to commit a wicked act, you must bring yourself to endure its unwelcome consequences.' (Euripides, Hecabe, l. 1250-51). These events are cases of justice turned on its head entirely. The persuasive technique that should have won the case failed, as did the appeal to basic human morals. The argument that won however was low and immoral, and completely unlike the Athenian law courts. The Hecabe portrays a very twisted pursuit of justice, where people become so desperate that they will offer absolutely anything to save themselves.
To the ancient Greeks, justice was all about revenge and reciprocity, but where should the line be drawn in these situations. The plays that best examine this topic are those of the Oresteia by Aeschylus. This trilogy of plays encapsulates the revenge of two families and three generations of those families. At the end of the last play, The Eumenides, the first ever trial is held and the whole issue of reciprocity as justice is examined. The accused is Orestes, who has killed his mother Clytemnestra, a terrible crime for the Greeks, but he did it in revenge because she murdered his father Agamemnon, and law dictated that you had a right, even a necessity, to avenge the death of your father. The judge is Athena, and the 'lawyers' are Apollo, for the defence, and the Furies, for the prosecution. Apollo 's argument is that the father 's death had to be avenged, because he is the more important parent. The Greeks did not think the woman had any part in childbirth, except for carrying the baby. It was the male who carried the seed for producing children, and therefore it was no great crime if Orestes killed his mother, because it was of far more importance that his father be revenged. The Furies argue that Orestes should be condemned for his violence alone, and that you should always honour your parents no matter what happens. In the end Athena decides in favour of Orestes, and he is acquitted. She says: 'with all my heat I am my Father 's child. I cannot set more store by the woman 's death- she killed her husband, guardian of her house. Even if the vote is equal, Orestes wins.' (Aeschylus, The Eumenides, l. 753-56). Athena states that she sides with Orestes because she agrees with Apollo that the mother is the lesser parent, she herself was born of man alone and therefore sees Orestes as just in what he did.
Ancient Greek tragedians all had a very different perspective on the pursuit of justice. At the time they were writing their plays, a new system of law was being introduced in Athens, and they are clearly affected by this. Euripides mocks the system for its reliance on rhetoric and persuasive speaking, and undermines it by showing how people in positions of authority can be swayed by bribes. Sophocles comments on how people 's fervent belief that they are following what is justice, will lead to their own downfall if they insist on ignoring the advice of others more wise than them. Aeschylus stages the first ever trial, reflecting the new trials that were being held in Athens, and shows for the first time how the court system works. He puts emphasis on rhetoric, as this is what eventually wins Apollo the case, being able to persuade Athena that the father is the crucial parent. This play shows how the Athenian democratic trial system was at least meant to work, but Aeschylus himself does not really comment on its fairness.
