Organizations are "entities that enable society to pursue accomplishments that cannot be achieved by individuals acting alone" (Gibson et al. , 1988:5). Based on this definition, it is logical to conclude that the organizations' effectiveness is directly related to human behaviour, as organizations are made of people. But how people and different interests can affect an organization' goals and the activities required to achieve them? Is the external market interaction fundamental for the survival of an organization? This study will discuss and critically analyse the goals, structure and culture of a particular organisation called ISNAR and how human behaviour affected its design and its future. Those questions will be addressed during the discussion.
I have chosen ISNAR as a case study because I was fortunate to be part of ISNAR team from 2001 to 2004 (until its closure) when I move with my programme to IFPRI (in Addis Ababa), where I remained until August 2005. The critical analysis presented in this paper is a result of my experience, my observation and several personal communications with members of the EPMR team and external consultants, as a kind of survey to understand, at the political and managerial level, what really happened during the closure of ISNAR.
The International Service for National Agricultural Research (ISNAR), a non-profit organization, was established in 1979 by the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) on the basis of recommendations of an international task force.
ISNAR 's organizational goals, structure and culture were influenced by a re-structuring phase ISNAR went through from 2001 to 2003. In fact, this restructuring was as a survival strategy. When finally, during 2003, the Board of Trustees and ISNAR 's main donor decided to close the organization. ISNAR was officially shut down as an independent organization in April 2004. However, as several projects had already been well evaluated in terms of performance and relevance, and were still fully funded, an alliance with a sister organization called International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) was approved by both Boards of Trustees.
The official agreement is available on ISNAR website.
In 2001 and 2002 ISNAR was evaluated by an External Program Management Review (EPMR) team and the results of its evaluation included far reaching of criticism of ISNAR 's weak performance in supplying services to stakeholders and the limited impact of its activities compared with the level of investment it demanded. The committee was composed of external experts and members of the donor community. The conclusion of this evaluation was that ISNAR had a relevant mandate (supported by the stakeholders) and its existence was necessary in order to fulfil the actual needs of national agricultural research organizations (NAROs), but a series of changes were necessary, especially in ISNAR 's strategic management. The report clearly identified mismanagement as one of the reasons why ISNAR lost its focus and was not able to fulfil stakeholders' needs. ISNAR management recognised the need for a new paradigm of innovation systems, partnership and sustainable development: unfortunately when it was already too late to maintain the interest of its main donors.
According to Thompson and Strickland (2003), the term strategic management refers to the managerial process of forming a strategic vision, setting objectives, crafting a strategy, implementing and executing the strategy, and then over time initiating whatever corrective adjustments in the vision, objectives, strategy, and execution are deemed appropriate.
Nevertheless, the impact of the EPMR report was evident throughout a series of changes made in the organization during 2002 and 2003 to avoid closure. A new road map was in a process of being designed, part of the ISNAR management was laid off, several researchers were dismissed, a more transparent attitude by the new management had appeared and new areas of research had emerged. Unfortunately, the damage caused by previous mismanagement proved to be terminal and the organization was finally closed down.
The following sections of this study will focus on ISNAR 's goals, structure and culture from the period of 2001 to 2004, when the last road map was developed and implemented.
According to the literature, the meaning of 'goal' has several similar definitions, such as "specific target that an individual is trying to achieve" (Gibson et. al., 1988:813), or an "intention behind a decision or action" (Mintzberg, 1983:246), or even a "high-order target which aims to make something better or prevent something bad happening" (ISNAR, 2002). All descriptions pointed to the same direction, a definition of what is wanted, for then acting in how to realise it.
The goal of an organization is usually defined in very early stage, when the organization is created. In the case of ISNAR, and the other CGIAR Centers, this was slightly different, as ISNAR was constantly redefining its strategy and its mission. For example, when ISNAR was created, the common goal of the CGIAR and its Centers was to increase sustainable food production in developing countries, with great emphasis on protecting biodiversity. Later on, goals moved from focusing on food production to facilitating the generation of knowledge for fighting poverty, and finally embracing an institutional innovation systems approach.
In this context, research goes from analysis of inputs and outputs to analysis of processes, structures, networks, organizations and institutions (see Hall et al 2005).
The ISNAR 's goal and mission presented below was developed during an internal program review, in 2001.
Source:
Although ISNAR 's mandate was re-introduced during each revision period, or every five years, this form of correction was not enough to avoid loss of focus and the growing distance between its actions and the organization 's goal. One of the reasons was because individuals in the organization (specially the top management) had their own goals, which sometimes differed from the organization 's goal, leading to a culture of individual 's goal settings. The literature shows that setting specifics goals increase performance because it helps the individuals to know what they are supposed to do (Gibson et al. , 1988:172), but this only works for simple jobs. Goal setting is often seen as a complex and difficult to sustain when dealing with complex jobs such as research or accounting, which are not always easy to measure, being clearly the case of ISNAR.
When observing the goal of ISNAR and the process of redefining it (from Road Map 2002), it was clear the management had a tendency to follow the agenda of the World Bank and United Nations. At the same time, the UN launched the MDG, ISNAR designed six programmes related to the MDG to address some of the issues demanded by the World Bank, ISNAR 's main donor. Due to a necessity to fulfil the donors' expectations, a crucial element was left behind (consciously or not) by the top management and BOT; ISNAR created the programmes, but did not have the expertise to implement them in a coherent and sustainable way. Or even worse, ISNAR did not have a competitive advantage, as much more capable organizations were addressing the same issues. As the projects started to emerge from the new road map, the researchers (and the top management) were not able to convince the donors to fund them, being more and more reliant on core funds, ultimately leaving a debit of one million US dollars in ISNAR 's account.
The Millennium Development Goals (MDG) are (1) eradicate extreme poverty and hunger, (2) achieve universal primary education, (3) promote gender equality and empower women, (4) reduce child mortality, (5) improve maternal health, (6) combat HIV/AIDS, Malaria and other diseases, (7) ensure environment sustainability, and (8) develop a global partnership for development.
As pointed out by Gardiner et. al (2003), the main challenges faced by the CGIAR (and consequentially ISNAR) were related to (a) strong pressure to produce impacts on poverty reduction, which demand different approaches from the classical research areas, taking into consideration an 'innovation systems' approach; (b) dealing with complex environments, the approaches needed to be more interdisciplinary and integrated into a single discipline to solve a common problem, shifting from programmatic procedures to conceptual framework and modes of integration; (c) understanding the external environment to define priorities, in a time where rapid changes in science, technology and globalization occurs; (d) competitive funding environment, which leads to a disconnection between the strategic plan of the organization and the reality, forcing the organization to adopt a 'flexible frame'; and (e) strategic thinking and planning process of not just managers, but every research, challenging the role and profile of scientists for delivering agricultural research for human development.
Sadly, this account clearly illustrates how some organizations define their goals not based on their expertise, or not targeting their clients, but their financial sources. But are the goals of financial organizations different from the needs of the beneficiaries? Based on the MDG, UN and the World Bank are addressing the critical issues to improve livelihood of least developed and developing countries, but the intermediary organizations are struggling to provide better services (according to their own goals) and be consistent with the goals of donors. With this challenge, there is a tendency of organizations, such as the CGIAR Centers, to build alliances among themselves, disappear, or to merge with national organizations, in order to reduce costs and be efficient.
The six programmes of ISNAR will be described in the coming section, when the organization 's structure will be discussed.
Gibson et. al. (1988:430) define an organization 's design as "consisting of managers' decisions and actions that result in a specific organizational structure". According to the authors, structure is "the formal pattern of how its people and jobs are grouped" and it is an important cause of individual and group behaviour, as the way the span of control is arranged will influence the division of labour, the delegation of authority and the functionality of its departmentalization. Span of control is also related to the top management 's view about the number of levels they should have in their organization (Cole, 2004:202).
Span of control refers to the number of people reporting to a given superior (Hodgetts, 1990:147) or to how relationships are structured between leaders and subordinates in organizations (Bohte and Meier, 2001).
Although there are millions of organizations in the world, doing similar activities or not, organizations are unique in terms of structure and its way of operating and managing. Cole (2004:187-8), as illustrated in Figure 1, identified key organizational variables which determine an organization structure:
The organizational variable 'people', identified above by Cole, was acknowledge by Mintzberg (1983:115), who identified five basic common elements to any organization, when observing the levels of power in an organization. They are as following:
Still according to Mintzberg (1983) cited by Robbins (1990:278-304), there are five distinct configurations for organizations, and each one is associated with the domination by one of the five elements listed above, depending on who controls what. The five structural designs to managers are (a) the simple structure (dominated by the strategic apex) ; (b) the machine bureaucracy (dominated by analysts); (c) the professional bureaucracy (dominated by the operating core); (d) the divisional structure (dominated by middle managers); and (e) the adhocracy (dominated by the support staff).
Organizational structure can be tall or flat, depending on the power distribution. Tall organizations tend to have decentralized authority, many authority levels, and narrow spans of control (Cole, 2004:195). In the other hand, flat organizations have centralized authority, few authority levels, and wide span of control. However, that does not mean that flat structures are better than tall structures, each structure must be suitable for the situation, the management characteristics, the subordinates, and the work itself.
The organizational structure adopted by ISNAR was tall in its design, having a divisional structure with middle managers (project leaders) linking the projects (production) to the top management; its design also indicated a decentralized authority, many authority levels (middle managers having authority to make decisions), and narrow span of control. The operational level of ISNAR had six thematic areas: 1) policies for institutional innovation for agricultural research; 2) linking research organizations and stakeholders in changing context; 3) learning for institutional innovation; 4) management of new technologies for agricultural research; 5) building capacity to respond to cross-sector demands; and 6) entrepreneurial partnership to support agricultural research. The Figure 2 shows the ISNAR organizational structure, where the projects were carried out by each thematic leader (middle managers), based on a plan developed at the end of each calendar year, together with the project budget. The project leaders had their own teams which were composed by senior researchers (with Ph.D.), researchers (with Ph.D. or not) and support staff (with higher education or not), from different background and with several different expertises. The span of control of each thematic leader was related to its capability to manage the project budget. In other words, once the project leader raised the necessary funds to carry out the projects, he or she had total control on how and where the resources were utilized, being committed only to give the necessary percentage of overhead to the administration and finance office. The projects were discussed between the project leader and the program director, but only as a formality, as the design and evaluation of the projects were responsibility of project leaders. The project leaders and the top management were also responsible for contacting the 'external environment'.
The overall advantages of tall and divisional structure, according to Robbins (1990) and Cole (2004), are related to its opportunities for career development, responsiveness, the accountability, and the benefits of a specialized team in each unit, as they are able to process information as if they were organizations themselves. However, an important consideration must be made when relating to the goals, as the units tend to override the organization 's goals. In this design, the headquarter makes the strategic decisions related to the organization as a whole. On the other hand, the overall weaknesses of a divisional structure are related to its long lines of communication and decision making, and the duplication of activities and resources, as two units may have a training office each, increasing the organization 's costs. Conflict may occur in a divisional structure model, since there is little incentive for cooperation. That was clear the case with ISNAR, as MTPs rarely worked together in the same project.
As a divisional structure, ISNAR adopted a decentralized approach. Decentralized structures have several advantages on a hierarchy model, as vertical layers (typical on hierarchy structures) tend to have high management costs, limited accountability, low productivity of managerial work, and misunderstandings that occur due to poor communication (Bauer, 2002). Internal communication was generally poor in ISNAR, as the organization did not have a culture of sharing information. More on this topic will be addressed in the coming section.
As indicated by Robbins (1990), organizations have personalities and those personalities are called organizational cultures. The author also suggests that organizational culture "refers to a system of shared meaning". The common understanding of what the organization is and how employees should behaviour are related to dominant values, the philosophy of the organization, basic assumptions and beliefs of members of the organization.
In Figure 3, Cole (2004) illustrates important interrelationships between the organization and internal/external forces.
Cole (2004) notes that the founders or their successors define the purpose and the goals of the organization based on the kind of culture they want to see. The culture of ISNAR was indeed defined by its founders and their ideologies, and also by its initial employees' views. Robbins (1990:545) argues that organizational culture can change, as it may be appropriate for certain time and conditions, as culture is influenced by several external factors, shown in Figure 3. This was the case of ISNAR, where the structure of the organization changed from a centralized to a decentralized approach, from a hierarchical to a more flexible approach, reflecting in its culture. The process of culture changing was observed by the staff when the organization 's new road map was launched, in 2001. The new culture demanded ISNAR 's employee to focus on projects supporting the new paradigm of innovation systems (changing tasks), work closely in partnership with other projects/professionals from the organization, and communicate directly to the middle and top management. New categories of performance evaluation were included, due to a cultural change, such as number of publications and fund raising abilities.
However culture cannot be precisely defined but rather perceived (Handy, 1993:191) cited by Cole (2004:105), there are some key aspects of organizational culture, identified by the author, that are significant, as presented in Figure 4.
Supporting the ideas of Handy, Robbins (1990:439) found that culture implies the existence of certain dimensions of characteristics that are closely associated and independent. Those key cultural characteristics are presented in Figure 5, with samples of those characteristics linked to ISNAR 's culture.
The ISNAR organizational culture changed due to its political circumstances. Robbins (1990) identifies several situational factors for changing organizational cultural, among them are "dramatic crises", which suits the case of ISNAR, where the crisis was caused by a financial break, the influences of cultural changes and the organization restructuring process. Staff participated in the last two years of the restructuring phase, the elaboration of the organization structure and witnessed the cultural changed. However, the time was not sufficient to determine if the new culture was accepted and committed to by all its employees, since the new organization survived only for less than two years after the new culture was in place. According to Robbins (1990), two years would represent a rapid adaptation to the new culture, four or five being more likely.
Sample of such crises include financial setback, the hostile takeover of the local organization by another organization, the loss of a major customer, or a dramatic technological breakthrough by a computer (Robbins, 1990:457).
This study has shown that organizations are run and controlled by human beings with different perceptions, values, status, leadership, motivations and personalities, which have an immediate impact on organizations' culture, structure and how to achieve the organizations' goals.
Based on the literature review and individual observations, the perception of ISNAR 's management (including top management, middle managers and the Board of Trustees) was conflicting with the needs of its beneficiaries, and more important, inconsistent with the organization 's mission. An organization may have a clear goal, chooses its suitable structure, or have a culture incorporated by all its members, but if the organization 's goal does not lead to expected (by donors and by the users) outputs and outcomes, it is inevitable that the organization will lose its scope and may end up like ISNAR, closing down. It is fundamental for the sustainability of organizations to follow the 'market' needs, delivering efficiently and effectively its goods, specially for development organizations, which are working with the aim to improve people 's life.
