With the day of accession to the European Union Poland accepted the Acquis Communautaire as a whole and for thick and thin. As a result it said 'yes' also to five cardinal market-related Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) objectives, outlined in the Article 39 of the Treaty of Rome.
As they date back to 1957 these objectives may be viewed as a relic of the past. Europe has moved forward since then, drifting away from the strictly market-related ideas of stabilisation, availability of supplies or increased productivity, towards the more sophisticated approach reflected in the concept of multifunctionality.
Nevertheless, in Polish agriculture there are still areas where some of the initial CAP aims remain applicable. The soft fruit market, that experiences repeating crisis situations, can serve as the most glaring example of market instability, that directly hinders its performance.
The aim of this essay is to show, that the third CAP objective of market stabilisation, only partially reflected in the Polish strategic document for agriculture, is still relevant to the situation on the soft fruit market in this country, but cannot be met due to the inadequate policy instruments.
The paper is organised as follows. Section 2 contains a brief overview of the soft fruit market situation in Poland and aims to prove the need for stabilisation. Section 3 presents the existing Common Agricultural Policy instruments on the market of fruit and vegetables as a whole, while section 4 explains why they cannot be successfully applied in Poland. Section 5 concludes the essay.
Accessing the European Union Poland, as a prominent soft fruit producer, brought in a very specific dowry. In the year 2004 it supplied c.a. 19% of strawberry, 16% of gooseberry, 44% of currant and 57% of raspberry production of the whole 25 nations, what is outlined in table 1.
This relatively high production levels were achieved only two years after the soft fruit supply breakdown in the year 2002 and are forecasted to fall again in 2005. Figure 1 shows this rapid annual supply fluctuations on this market in Poland between the year 2000 and 2005.
Supply variations on this market are accompanied by the reversed trend in price changes showed in figure 2. In this relatively short six-year period prices fell drastically twice mirroring the growth in production and peaked as production decreased.
The provisional figures for the year 2005 show further price decrease, as in the middle of this year Polish producers faced massive influx on competitive prices of fresh and frozen fruits from the third countries (strawberries from China and Morocco, raspberries from Serbia and Chile).
Dyngus, M., Soft fruit market in Poland, Information Bulletin No 11 (173), Agricultural Market Agency, November 2005, p. 46.
To prove that this market conditions affect farmers incomes in Poland is a difficult task, because of the lack of data. The only measure available in the investigated literature is the profitability index, that relates the estimated costs of production to the observed prices and is shown in figure 3.
The profitability of production of strawberries for processing, raspberries, black and red currant reached its peak in the year of production decrease, and price increase (2003), to collapse rapidly the year later - the year of accession to the EU.
G  rka, W., Tough talks on soft fruits, Has  o ogrodnicze, No 1/2005.
This unfortunate coincidence opened the debate on the role of the Common Market Organisation (CMO) for fruit and vegetables in alleviating price and supply fluctuations on the soft fruit market in Poland. The discussion inevitably equalled looking back to the very first objectives of the Common Agricultural Policy established by the Treaty of Rome in 1957, and in particular to the one of market stabilisation, as the situation on this market in Poland desperately calls for solutions bringing long awaited balance.
The abovementioned problem is also indirectly addressed in the key document outlining agricultural policy objectives for Poland, namely in the 'Strategy for the development of rural areas and agriculture 2007-2013 (with elements of forecast until 2020)'. Objective 3, Priority 3 of the Strategy aims at the increase of farmers importance and participation in the food-chain, through - inter alia - encouragement for formation of producer organisations (POs). This is an important point, as the encouragement of farmer 's membership in such organisations is one of the key instruments for market stabilisation within the CMO for fruit and vegetables.
The Common Market Organisation for fresh fruit and vegetables enjoys the most 'market-friendly' policy instruments. The majority of them aim at fostering market orientation of producers and stabilising the environment in which they function.
The financial support for producers on this market is channelled mainly through producer organisations, defined as legal entities, formed on the own initiative of growers of fruits, vegetables, nuts and mushrooms. They have at their disposal the operational funds subsidised in 50% via an EU contribution and used to finance their activities.
Council Regulation (EC) No 2200/96 of 28 October 1996 on the common organisation of the market in fruit and vegetables, Article 11, 1 (a).
Ibidem, Article 15.
The single fact of introduction of producer organisations to the market as well as many of their aforementioned activities aim at market stabilisation mainly through:
Ibidem, Article 11, 1 (b). concentration of supply: producers grouped together strengthen their position in negotiations with market players from up- and downstream industries and gain more control over the key market variable - price; adjustment of production to the market demand in terms of quality and quantity: producer organisations can use operational funds to invest in promotion campaigns, boost products' commercial value, create organic product lines, etc; they are more likely to deliver large and homogenous lots complying with processors' and retailers' needs;.
The horticulture sector in the European Union, Fact sheet, European Commission, Directorate General for Agriculture, June 2003, p. 5. stabilisation of producer prices: producer organisations plan production according to contract deals and avoid market distorting surpluses. In addition they have right to withdraw from the market any of the products covered by the regime and distribute them free of charge to charities, for animal feed, processing for industrial alcohol or simply destroy. In case of 16 products organisations can claim compensation for up to 10% of the quantity marketed. The scheme, however, does not cover soft fruits.
Council Regulation (EC) No 2200/96..., op.cit., Article 23.
Ibidem, Article 30.
Ibidem, Article 23.
The price stabilisation aim is also addressed under the CMO for processed fruit and vegetables, that unfortunately covers only tomatoes, peaches, pears and citrus fruits grown for processing.
Council Regulation (EC) No 2201/96 of 28 October 1996 on the common organisation of the market in processed fruit and vegetable products.
Ibidem, Article 1, 2.
Under this regime, despite the production aid is directly granted to processors, it is targeted at producer groups. To be eligible for support, the processor has to pay to producers not less than the minimum price set for the given period. The delivery to processors has to be done by the producer group and be based on contracts specifying price, quantities and the schedule of supply.
Ibidem, Article 2, 2.
The horticulture sector...op.cit., p. 7-8.
It should not be overlooked, that on this market also price supporting mechanisms of trade policy are applied, in order to either discourage excessive imports or to encourage exports of price depressing surpluses, such as import and export licences, import duties and export refunds, however the latter do not apply to soft fruits.
The horticulture sector...op.cit., p. 9.
The system of support described above allows the EU producers of certain fruits and vegetables to operate in a reasonably stable environment. It is worth noting, that the instruments encouraging farmer co-operation proved to be effective in the former EU-15, as they resulted in high levels of market organisation, expressed in the percentage of production marketed through producer organisations, shown in table 1.
Nearly 1 350 producer organisations channelled almost 40% of all fruit and vegetable production to market in the year 2002. Their number and sizes varied widely among Member States of the former EU-15. While in the Netherlands and Belgium more than 70% of all fruit and vegetable production was marketed through producer organisations, the percentage was much lower in the three most important producing Member States: less than 30% for Italy, 40% for Spain and 50% for France.
Analysis of the Common market organisation in fruit and vegetables, Commission staff working document, Brussels, 03.09.2004, SEC(2004) 1120, p.13.
This numbers, however are incomparable with the rate of fruit and vegetable market organisation in Poland.
In mid-June 2005 in Poland there were only 38 registered producer organisations. Their share in total fruit and vegetable production did not exceed 2%. It can be therefore inferred, that the share of soft fruit producers must be negligible.
Market analyses, Fruit and vegetable market. Current state and perspectives, Institute for Agriculture and Food Economics, June 2005, p. 4.
The main question that arises is what are the reasons for this state of affairs? In Poland the concept of producer organisations appeared in the public debate in the late 90s, but entered the legislation only in 2000. However, in the common perception the created law did not encouraged farmers for getting together, mainly due to the relatively small levels of financial support. In 2004 the regulation was amended in line with the EU legislation.
The legal act of 15 September 2000, concerning producer groups and their associations (Official Journal No. 88).
Producer groups, Polish Television (TVP), Farm News, 3 October 2005, , 20051003251818.strona (viewed 3.12.2005).
The legal act of 19 December 2003 on the organisation of the fruit and vegetable, hops, tobacco and dried fodder (Official Journal No. 223, point 2221).
Nevertheless, according to the survey run among 839 members of producer organisations in agriculture in the Podlasie region, by the Farm Advisory Centre in Szepietowo, the most important reasons for such poor levels of market organisation are more of social than legal and economical character.
G  siorek, P., Advantages, barriers and future of self-organisation of agricultural producers in Podlaskie Voivodship, Farm Advisory Centre - Szepietowo, roln001.htm (viewed 10.12.2005).
The respondents noted that low levels of farmer co-operation lie in: lack of the team spirit and mutual trust (52.5%), lack of leader (7.5%), lack of knowledge as to the running of the enterprise (7.5%), lack of interest and finally lack of substantial financial benefits (both 7.5%). Only 25% respondents quoted the insufficient support from the public and non-government institutions as a reason. This findings supposedly, with a low risk of over-interpretation, can be generalised across the farming population in Poland.
Ibidem.
The striking and straightforward diagnosis, that farmers simply do not trust each other and do not want to act together raises a question why this is the case. First and foremost, their deeply rooted scepticism seems to be sourced by the negative past experience. Under the communist regime, the best way of protection from the government interference was self-sufficiency and self-reliance. This still manifests itself in aspiration for independence from the external environment and mistrust not only for the outsiders, but also for neighbours and fellow farmers competing on the local markets.
G  siorek, P., Advantages, barriers and future...op.cit.
This mentality can put the future of producer organisations in Poland in question and in turn impede, if not prevent, the completion of market stabilisation objective. Nevertheless, even if farmers eventually overcame their hindering attitudes and started forming producer groups, they still would not enjoy the full spectrum of policy instruments existing on this market, as they simply to not apply to soft fruits, what has already been stated in section 3 and ought to be emphasised.
Welcoming Poland among it 's members transformed the Community into an important soft fruit producer, but also the one with a highly unregulated and unstable market, where the 'invisible hand' rocks the swing of supplies, prices and farm incomes.
The existing policy instruments, that aim at stabilising the market conditions, cannot serve as solutions to this problem, as they simply do not apply to soft fruits, are not attractive to Polish farmers or do not suit their mentality (or vice versa).
Tanking the necessary actions to alter this status quo appears to be a must for the policy makers, both on the domestic and European levels. Otherwise they might face the risk of accusations of the government failure not being able to achieve the objective as old as the Treaty of Rome.
