There are lots of concerns over the use of genetically modified organisms in the production of food. This topic is incredibly controversial and appears very frequently in the news. Naturally, consumers are wary about new technologies as no one can predict the long term effects of genetically modified food, even with detailed scientific research and trials. Most consumers rely on the media to make their judgment on genetically modified food. These sources do provide information but some tend to be bias and simplified. This may mean consumers lose the right to an informed decision due to the lack of information available to them.
The consumer concerns will be considered to see if they are justified but also the benefits that genetically modified food may hold for the world will be examined. Also the background of genetically modified organisms and how they are created will be explored.
Genetically modified is a term used to describe the insertion, enhancement or deletion of a particular characteristics of an organism. This is done by altering genes in the DNA of a specific organism. The insertion of specific genes may either be from a species very closely related to itself or from a distant species. This is because all genes come from DNA and all DNA has the same basic structure.
Genetic modification involves removing a desired gene from one organism and joining the gene onto a plasmid. The plasmid and desired gene together are known as recombinant DNA. The recombinant DNA is then inserted into a bacterium, in which reproduction occurs. This process produces more bacterium with copies of recombinant DNA. The bacterium, with the copies of recombinant DNA then infects the organism that requires the specific characteristic. Before genetic modification, desired traits were achieved through farmers by selective breeding. However this method is very time consuming and it is not accurate unlike genetic modification. Genetic modification is more specific and can create the exact characteristic.
There are many consumer concerns about the use of genetically modified food. These concerns can be categorised into environmental hazards, health risks and economic concerns. All these categories involve whether genetically modified food is safe and will be examined closely.
Environmental hazards of genetic engineering include inadvertent gene transfer to non target species. For example, crops that have been engineered to be herbicide tolerant might crossbreed with weeds creating  'super weeds', that would be herbicide tolerant. This is a very justified concern because if  'super weeds' were to be introduced into the environment it may also affect the growth of other crops that are essential food for humans. There is also concern that genetically modified crops could reduce the effectiveness of pesticides. Many people worry that insects will become resistant to crops that have been genetically modified to produce their own pesticides, therefore reducing the quantity of food. Genetic modification may also lead to undesirable consequences such as reducing the biodiversity of traditional crops.
The health risks involved with genetically modified food include the tendency to promote allergic reactions and the unknown effects on health. As allergies increase in society it is important to minimise the risk of allergic reactions to genetically modified food. This can be done by not transferring genes from species where there is a known allergic reaction such as peanuts but genetic modification may also introduce new allergies into society. Extensive testing of genetically modified food may be required to avoid the possibility of harm to consumers with food allergies. As the effects on human health have only been researched over a small time scale, the long term risk to human health is unknown. Introducing new genes into food may have a negative effect on human health that may not be noticeable for years. Another concern relates to the vectors used for transforming plant cells. These contain genes for antibiotic resistance. These antibiotic resistant genes enter the transformed plant with the desired gene. The antibiotic resistant gene may be passed into the E.coli bacteria in the gut, making it resistant to some types of antibiotics. This concern is antibiotics are very commonly used in medical treatments.
The consumer concern over the economics of genetically modified food is justified with two strong arguments. One is the cost marketing the genetically modified food. It is an expensive process and consumers worry that biotech companies just want to make a profit and are not interested in consumer welfare. The other concern involves the patents on the genetically modified crops. The concern is that the developing countries farmers will not be able to afford the seeds for the genetically modified crop. This is a big problem because one of the benefits of genetically modified food is it will ensure that there is enough food for the world 's population, especially in the developing countries.
Some of the consumer concerns are justified but genetically modified food may hold many benefits. The main advantage is ensuring an adequate food supply. The world 's population is increasing and one of the ways to meet the demand is through the genetic manipulation of plants. There are many ways that genetic modification can increase the amount of food produced and make crops more useful. These include, enabling plants to become cold or drought resistant, improving resistance to pests, improving storage time and enhancing the production of vitamins.
Cold and drought resistant plants are important because when there are extreme climate changes crops can fail. Unexpected cold weather can destroy seedlings. If the crop is genetically modified using an antifreeze gene the seedlings will not die, therefore ensuring a food supply.
As insect pests reduce the world 's crop population by over 13% per year it is important to combat pests. This can be done by the use of chemicals. However this method causes environmental problems as the run off of agricultural wastes from excessive pesticides can contaminate the water supply and the pesticides could be damaging to consumers health. By genetic modification of pest resistant plants, less pesticides need to be used on plants.
An example of a pest resistant plant is maize as it contains a gene from the bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt gene). It is the protein that is produced by the Bt gene that is toxic to some insect pests. The insect resistant genetically modified maize is rarely sprayed with pesticides because the Bt gene provides continuous protection to the plant because of the toxic protein that is being produced. Another consumer advantage of the genetically modified maize is that the insecticide is confined just to the maize so there is less damage to the surrounding environment.
Improving storage time is important, so consumers get a product that keeps longer and fewer crops are wasted. Genetic modification for storage is shown in the FlavrSavr tomato. Usually when tomatoes ripen a gene is triggered and a chemical is released that causes the fruit to soften and then rot. Scientists have modified that gene in the tomato by switching it off, so the tomato softens slowly and this prolongs shelf life.
In developing countries malnutrition is common because people are unable to have a varied diet. Genetically modifying a crop like rice, so it contains added vitamins and minerals, not usually found in rice could be beneficial. It may help combat some of the vitamin deficiency and improve the health of people.
In conclusion, some consumer concerns are justified however genetically modified food does also have some benefits. The main justified concern is the unknown effect on human health. The short and long term effects of genetically modified food need to be researched further and this will allow consumers to make a more informed decision about genetically modified food. At present some consumer concerns are due to lack of information about genetically modified organisms and do n't understand all the implications involved with genetically modified food. The government understands consumer concerns and takes the human right of adequate food supply and has tried to alleviate some of the their concerns with labelling laws and policies. The policies state that all genetically modified foods exported must be labelled. This allows consumers to have a choice whether they take the risk and buy genetically modified product or not. However consumers must also realise the potential of genetically modified food in the future. It is a way of ensuring a food supply for the world, with benefits such as pest resistant crops and increase nutritional value of crops.
This powerful technology has got to be applied with caution if it is going to be implemented successfully on a world scale. Genetic modification may also need to be refined slightly to improve safety and reassure consumers. However scientists must always remember that once food has been genetically altered there is no way of getting back to the food original makeup.
