Achieving equality of opportunities and social justice is one of the main goals of human development (UNDP, 2005). However, there 's evidence that inequality has been increasing at all levels, from the very macro, being enhanced by processes of economic liberalisation and globalisation, to the inter-local, related to competition and flows of capital and labour, to the intra-local (although reports on increase or decrease of inequality are contested at this level), because of local market dynamics, rural-urban differentiation and social group differentiation (Fuentes, 2005; De Souza Briggs, 2003). Although it can be relatively straightforward to recognise, analyse and therefore try to reduce inequality at the macro- and meso- levels (for example using the Human Development Index (UNDP, 2005); or by means of econometric studies, such as the one conducted by Anderson (2005) on the basis of various independent studies in different countries; or the one developed by Balisacan and Fuwa (2004) for the specific case of the Philippines), many local intervention projects fail to appropriately recognise intra-communal difference, leading to increased inequality, persistent poverty and thus failure to achieve the expected development results (Welbourn, 1991; Chambers, 1997).
Thus, although in theory there is a large pool of research on social difference which confirms that rural communities hardly ever are homogeneous and that the poorest groups can have different attributes, outsiders still continue to treat communities as being uniform (Welbourn, 1991; Chambers, 1997). This paper intends to present an overview of the dimensions of social difference at the intra-communal level, and the challenges they represent for development interventions. To illustrate these, some issues related to family planning will be used as an example.
According to Welbourn (1991), four major dimensions of difference can be recognised within communal life: age, gender, ethnic or social group and poverty or wealth. Although the first two are from biological nature and the last ones socially defined, shaping economic and political distinctions, they all have an important influence on peoples' perceptions, priorities and access to resources and opportunities and their analysis can lead to a better understanding of how the community functions.
The importance of age can be regarded from the point of view of dissimilar cultural values, perceptions, demands and priorities between generations, which are enhanced by the rapid development of communication technologies, the perception of new and better opportunities away from home or from the family 's traditional livelihoods and the increased mobility of younger people to urban areas. However, it is also associated with the increased vulnerability of older people, because of higher levels of dependence, their lack of access to regular income sources, ineffective social security systems, changes in family structure that reduce support for the elderly, poor health, exclusion from health care and educational services, inadequate shelter, malnutrition and a general neglect of their basic human rights (Du Tlessis, n.d.).
Gender disparities in nutrition, health, mortality, education, rights of ownership, access to resources, access to the labour market, freedom of movement and dressing, participation and in general in quality of life are among the profoundest kinds of inequality (UNDP, 2005; Chambers, 1997; Morrison & J  tting, 2005). At the same time, men and women tend to have markedly different social and economic roles in the village and thus different knowledge, perceptions and priorities. Men are inclined to manage all that is modern, market-led and large-scale, while women usually deal with most local diversity: home gardens, non timber forest products, domestic livestock, internal organic linkages of farming systems (such as recycling of agricultural residues and manure for fodder and composting) as well as the care of the children and house. The problem is that all these female activities remain mostly unnoticed because they are small scale and scattered throughout the year, and their products are scarcely or not at all marketed (Chambers, 1997).
Inequality related to ethnic background can be easily recognised at all levels both in developing and developed countries. See for example Justino et al (2004), for patterns of inequality among racial groups in Brazil, including income, education, health and political participation differences; or UNDP (2005: 58) for unequal health status among racial and ethnic groups in the USA, which can be closely related to differences in insurance coverage, income, language and education; or Jeffrey et al (2005) for a study of the increase in differences in employment and income opportunities between castes in Uttar Pradesh, India, as a result of greater or lower access to schooling.
Poverty and wealth, although recognised and accepted as social differentiation dimensions, are often misinterpreted by outsiders' surveys. For example, in a case study by Cottam (cited by Chambers, 1997) when using property indicators for assessing wealth, a family living in a good house was considered better off, while another one having a cardboard cottage was considered poorer, without taking into account that the first one was rented and the second one was on land the family owned. In this case, local people 's assessments are far more appropriate and reliable, because they are based on deeper knowledge of local uses (Chambers, 1997).
Additionally to these four dimensions, there are other sources of difference, such as: capability, which comprises different skills that enable people to respond to varying conditions; health status, including physical and mental well-being and disabilities; level of education; livelihood strategy or occupation; types of assets; quantity and quality of relationships and social connections (social capital) (Chambers, 1997). Although location is another source of difference, for example when comparing urban and rural areas (UNDP, 2005; De Souza Briggs, 2003), this aspect will not be considered extensively here because the focus of this essay is in intra-communal social difference.
Although in the previous paragraphs social difference has been regarded as a source of inequality and injustice, it has also a fundamental functional role in poor households. Diversity and complexity represent part of the strategy of poor people to reduce vulnerability and achieve some more security, by allowing households to have a larger range of sources of food, income, support and generally means of survival (Chambers, 1997). A significant part of this diversity is accomplished through the different roles of each member of the family, which are determined by their social characteristics: "On any one day, one adult may be collecting firewood, another preparing food, cooking, cleaning and washing, another herding cattle, another mending an implement, another working for a neighbour, and another working in an office in a town, while the small children collect jungle greens as food, weeds and grass as fodder, and twigs and leaves as fuel" (Chambers, 1997: 169).
Both because of the negative aspects of social differentiation (consisting in inequality of opportunities and of quality of life) and of its positive outcomes (determined by diversification of livelihood sources within households), it is vital for development interventions to be able to identify these differences and their role in shaping the lives of the client group. An interesting example lies in projects working for the provision of family planning advice to communities. In a study conducted by Welbourn (1991) in Malawi, she found out that both dimensions of gender and age, but also the local traditional concepts of wealth and status interacted in people 's attitudes towards family care: while the majority of women said they did not mind having more children and some said they were afraid their husband would not want them to use contraceptives, young men did not see the necessity of family planning because they perceived the population to be decreasing (because of migration). Even so, they were interested in having more time between children, but stated that women did not want to. When older men were asked, they did perceive an increase in population and a shortage on land and they believed family planning was an urgent need. They also affirmed that it was women who were not interested in contraception, because they competed with one another for children. The truth was, there were customary values influencing women 's preferences: traditionally, families with more children were allowed to ask the local chief for more land in order to divide it amongst the sons; thus, women were glad to have more children because that would mean managing more land. At present, however, as there is no new land available, this rule does no longer apply, although women appear to be following it still. This local case clearly illustrate the need to know the opinions of all groups involved before designing the intervention strategy: reproductive health officers would not have been enough to introduce family planning to this community, because some anthropological issues were lying behind. Furthermore, if men had been excluded from this survey (as is often the case in family planning research and interventions, then most probably the project would have resulted in failure.
A very different case can be observed in a rural community in Ghana (Adongo et al, 1997): A study conducted among young and old women, young men, opinion leaders and compound heads revealed that few women regarded it as their role to make decisions about birth control, because they and their children were the property of the family and social values are against contraception; that women wanting nonetheless to use contraception had to do it without family or social support; and that, as in the case of Malawi, children have high value in cultural, economic and social terms, so that having high mortality risks, women prefer to have more children in order to ensure the survival of at least one of them. In this case, women 's position within the couple, the family and the community society seems to be an important source of possible conflict. In order to increase women 's opportunities for reproductive health, the strategy should be directed to the community as a whole, with the aim that the traditional leaders support family planning and transfer these new values to the commune and the individual households.
The above mentioned very local examples can contribute to illustrate how social differences affect people 's opinions and preferences and roles within the community, and why they need to be considered in order to have successful results in any kind of intervention. As shown, these dimensions of difference interact with each other, which makes their analysis even more difficult. It is sometimes not enough to talk about women and their needs, but about the special needs of single mothers, divorcees, poorer wives, old widows, lower caste spouses, ... (Chambers, 1997).
Things become even more complicated when trying to assess income and family resource distribution, because data are normally surveyed on the basis of households. Observations have shown that households are not necessarily harmonic and altruistic bodies where all members cooperate and where resources are distributed equally. Within them there are always "competing claims, rights, power, interests and resources" which need to be accounted for by means of researching what happens inside households (Chant, 2003: 19).
Failing to recognise these difference may lead projects to increase the gap between the poor and the better-off, which should be the opposite of what is expected. For example, the strategy of building local institutional frameworks to enhance participation without consideration of structural disadvantages of the poor can lead to an over-representation of the most favoured ones, because the poorest are less able to exercise agency effectively, have fragile and limited social relationships and frequently can not afford (in terms of time, transportation or other costs) to represent their own interests (Cleaver, 2005). Thus, empowering is positive depending on who are empowered and how their new power is used. If the empowered ones are exploiting outsiders or a local elite, then this is not good for the poorer and disadvantaged. In this sense, differentiating groups and interest can help to refine the target of the intervention in order to empower the really poorer by giving them confidence to confront others and defend their position (Chambers, 1997).
However, a balance is required between depth of analysis and manageability of this diagnostic, which should be an input for the intervention design, not an end in itself. Therefore, recognising that differences may exist and trying to identify the most relevant dimensions that shape inequality and affect community cohesion in a specific location, by means of participatory appraisal methodologies, should be the main task in this stage (Welbourn, 1991).
Differences within and between communities - at all levels and of all natures: age, gender, social group, poverty, and other social characteristics - exist everywhere and are relevant, so identifying and taking them into account should be part of any good intervention project. Efforts should therefore be made in order to improve projects' and programmes' targeting and thus reduce inequality, recognise sources of conflict and opportunities of joint action.
