An idea reinforced by the first language acquisition theorists was that of an innate universal grammar (UG) and Language Acquisition Device (LAD), (Chomsky, 1965), which functions to aid the development of language. Thus, all human beings are born predisposed to acquire language and the rules that govern it. If such a device is universal, then there lies the assumption that everybody everywhere is born with the same ability to acquire their mother tongue. Thus, there exists no cultural bias to influence the ways in which a child acquires his or her language, whether it is English, Chinese or Spanish. However, the language input a child receives from its immediate environment constitutes as another major influence in the acquisition of language. This essay intends to focus on 'child-directed speech,' a form of language input and will examine the cultural biases attached to input of this kind. 'Child-directed speech (CDS),' (Snow 1995:180) is a type of language input and refers to the speech directed to children by their elders. According to Snow, (1995:180), child-directed speech '...differs from speech among peers in a variety of dimensions. It is syntactically simpler, more limited in vocabulary...more correct, and more fluent.' These conclusions drawn on by Snow constructs the assumption that adults are providing and inputting a variety of their language which they have selected to be appropriate for communication with their child. This idea is supported by notion that the way parents talk to their children is 'fine-tuned,' as Snow, (1995:182) states.
Examples to maintain the idea that parents fine-tune their language is found in Snow, (1995:183), who describes the findings of a longitudinal study by Pan, Feldman, and Snow (1993). The researchers examined 'parental measures such as MLU,' (mean length of utterance), and found that 'growth in the same measure of the child 's language was a significant predictor of parental growth rate - suggesting rather specific parent-to-child tuning.'.
Therefore, as the child 's MLU increased, so did their parents when they addressed him or her. This correlation could be interpreted as the adult attempting to fine-tune his/her language to match the child 's. However, contrary to this idea, it could also be that as child is becoming older, the way the adult uses CDS becomes more complex, and the child is reflecting this in his or her language. In this way it is difficult to establish cause and effect.
However, assuming that the parent is doing both of the above options - fine-tuning and simultaneously influencing the child 's language development, then the way in which children are addressed is somewhat at the caregivers discretion, though not totally. If this is true there ought to be social and cultural differences between the way children in different families not only acquire language, but the way in which they go on to use language. This has important cultural implications as stated in Ochs and Schieffelin (1995:76) where it is stated that, 'In all societies, members want to get their intentions across to children. This is a universal propensity of human culture, a prerequisite for the transmission of cultural orientations from one generation to the next.'.
The way in which people within the various different language communities view CDS is culturally biased because the way in which a child is addressed is likely to vary depending on the values, social norms and beliefs of the culture they belong to. This concept derives from the theory of 'Language Socialisation.' This term, outlined in Ochs and Schieffelin, (1984) went on to be explained as 'the process by which children are socialised both through language and to use language within a community,' in Ochs and Schieffelin (1995:73).
The language socialisation approach supports the idea of linguistic relativity, (Ochs and Schieffelin, 1995:74). Therefore language is inextricably tied to thought, though it does not necessarily determine it. In this sense, the way you think is capable of influencing the way you speak to people, suggesting parents are not always making a conscious choice of the way they address their children, as previously suggested. As the socialization theory proposes, it could be that parents are unconsciously basing communicating with their children on the social norms of their community. For example, with reference to fine-tuning, Snow (1995:185) commented that 'the Qu'iche Mayan cultural prescription that high pitch be used to persons of high status conflicts with the otherwise universal use of high pitch to (low status) infants.' This example, originally found within Ratner and Pye, (1984), supports the notion that when parents fine-tune, it is culturally bound.
Nevertheless, the effectiveness of CDS, with regard to fine-tuning, cannot be merely defined as culturally bound. The effectiveness of CDS is also dependant on who is fine-tuning, and the role of that person in the child 's life.
According to Snow (1995:183) 'older siblings produce CDS that is less finely tuned to the child 's developmental level.' Thus, non-appearance of fine-tuning from particular communicators may not necessarily be detrimental to a child 's language development, (Snow, 1995:183). Therefore, it is important to look at who is addressing the child when considering the effects of CDS.
When considering who is talking to the child, it is important to think about how that person perceives the child and the way the child perceives them . Mothers often behave as role models and do set examples when interacting with their children, as shown below in an example (1) taken from Gleason, Perlmann, and Greif, (1984:500-1). (1).
Behaviourist theorists view children as passive participants (Skinner, 1957) who often imitate caregivers and use them as role models in order to inherit behaviour appropriate to their environment. In the above example the child has learnt, (even if only in the short term), one of the preferred and socially acceptable ways to construct an interrogative, (within a particular context). The child has notably imitated its mother, allowing her to become a role model and one of the people he or she could base their language use on. A facilitative relationship like this may be beneficial as the child 's language develops further.
However, a facilitative relationship does n't always entail the child imitating his or her mother. This would be dependant on the content of the parents speech because sometimes a child may be continually exposed to particular utterances or grammatical forms but it may not necessarily repeat it. This could imply the child has developed knowledge of what is and realises that it is n't appropriate for child usage. This is counter-evidence to the Behaviourist view that children are passive and rely on imitation in order to learn language. According to (Ochs and Schieffelin, 1995:85). 'Children 's production of a particular form may reflect their understanding of that form as inappropriate for child use.' This could be a sign of a child 's simultaneous use of their 'language competence' and 'cultural competence.' (Ochs and Schieffelin, 1995:85).
For example, an infant 's first words are usually very conventionalised, (Ochs and Schieffelin, 1995). Therefore, a child 's first word is likely to reflect what is important to it and also what is socially acceptable within that particular society. The most common examples include "mummy" or "daddy." However, among the traditional Samoan children, a child 's first word is part of a curse like "Eat Shit!" (Ochs and Schieffelin, 1995:83). Utterances like this would be considered taboo in many other language communities, particularly if used by a child, but appear to be acceptable amongst Samoan adults.
Another method of a parent 's attempts to facilitate their child 's language could include the use of prompts like: (2).
This example, found in Ely and Gleason (1995:260), could be interpreted as the mother recognising the child 's potential as a conversational partner, and therefore a speaker not just addressee.
Whereas the actions of the mother shown in example (1) and (2) is clearly a significant attempt to increase the child 's 'communicative competence,' (Hymes, 1972; Ely and Gleason, 1995:252), the actions and role of the father may differ slightly.
According to Ely and Gleason, (1995:263), 'Father 's conversations often focus on complex concepts.' It is therefore the authors' belief that fathers do not necessarily fine-tune their language to their child the way mothers do. Thus, differences in CDS may not just be confined to cultural variation, but also the dissimilarity between the child 's communication with their mother and the communication with their father.
An additional factor to consider whilst discussing a child 's communication with each parent, is that a dissimilarity, as addressed above, may be increased if the child is raised to be bilingual. This would be due to each parent possessing the knowledge of different languages and ideologies of how CDS should be approached. Contrasting views are likely to effect the child 's rate of acquisition for whichever languages their parents speak. For example, as previously noted within this section, fathers tend not to fine-tune their language to their children as ably as mothers. If this is so in a situation where the child is to be raised bilingually with the 'one parent-one language' rule, (Goodz, 1989; De Houwer, 1990), the child is unlikely to develop the fathers language at a rate that matches the mothers language.
However, an adult choosing not to fine-tune their language to suit a child is not universally seen as harmful to a child 's language development. With reference to grammar, some communities believe that children need to hear 'linguistically complex and not simplified speech to become grammatically competent.' (Ochs and Schieffelin, 1995:78). For example, Kaluli adults were surprised to hear that parents in western society produced baby talk to young children and wondered how the children acquired the language correctly, (Schieffelin, 1990).
Not all cultures embrace methods of responding to children 's speech or recognising them as speakers. Some cultures do n't recognise children as addressees until, for example, the child acquires some of the language and is able to speak it. Thus, how the child is addressed is dependant on their 'communicative role.' (Ochs and Shieffelin 1995:92).
According to Ochs and Shieffelin (1995:77), 'In a number of societies, infants are not engaged as addressees until they evidence that they can produce recognisable words in the language.' They provide an example of research on the K'iche' Mayan people (Pye, 1992), who this is true for. Ochs and Shieffelin (1995:77) then quote Heath, (1983:86) who found that African American working class families in South Carolina, USA ' do not see babies or young children as suitable partners for regular conversations. For an adult to choose a preverbal infant over an adult as a conversational partner would be considered ... strange behaviour .' Thus, these K'iche' and American children are adopting a more 'peripheral role,' until they get older as a opposed to a 'central role' whereby the child is realised as a speaker and addressee as in example (1) and (2). (Ochs and Shieffelin, 1995:92). Thus, the amount or time at which CDS becomes available for the child is also dependant on the communicative role a child obtains, in his or her society.
The communicative roles children adopt varies from culture to culture. Children will also often adopt different roles in different situations, but when and how often they do so will vary between communities, (Ochs and Shieffelin, 1995). This is further evidence to maintain the idea that CDS is culturally biased to the extent that different cultures will often embrace different methods of CDS. Some will provide a lot, others wo n't. Some will simplify their speech and others wo n't and some will address the child at an earlier age than others. Because of differences like this, the effects of CDS will also be varied from culture to culture, and as discussed earlier, there will even be variation within the same culture. This idea stems from the type of input depending on, for example, the gender of the primary caregiver. An earlier example under heading (4) on bilingual children also highlights the probability that conflicting ideas of how CDS is carried out is of how CDS is carried out is likely to effect the rate of acquisition of the languages.
The examples I have provided of CDS within different cultures such as K'iche' Mayan, Kaluli or African American demonstrates the various ideologies which may effect language development. Although, language development is more dependant on language structure, (Snow, 1995:193), than culture and its ideology, various approaches to CDS is still influential. However, differences in the effects of CDS would be difficult to research and quantify on a global scale and has so far not been researched as Snow (1995:186) says, 'We have not even begun to analyse whether variation within the culturally prescribed forms of CDS in every society relate to differences in speed or ease of language development by the children in that society.'.
Whilst it is challenging to generally correlate a particular approach to CDS (e.g. simplification or complexity), with a particular effect, research has shown that CDS is a universal phenomena which identifies the significant tie between language and culture.
