It has been argued that an open trade regime is very important for the economic development of small developing countries as these countries face constraints in the size of their domestic market and in the abundance of their resources. In the following the propositions regarding the effects of opening a small developing country to free trade are analysed and discussed.
Characteristically, small countries face a perfectly elastic supply of imports and a perfectly elastic demand for exports which means they are unable to influence the price of imports and exports (Ayhan Kose, 2002). Further, they trade on world capital markets at an exogenously given rate of interest and their R&D activities do not influence the rate of accumulation of knowledge capital in the world at large (Grossman and Helpman, 1991).
Small developing countries in particular tend to rely heavily on a narrow range of primary commodities for their export earnings. These earnings tend to be highly unstable because of recurrent and sharp fluctuations in the relative prices of primary commodities, hence these countries are highly vulnerable to external shocks. Further, small developing countries tend to depend heavily on imported capital goods and intermediate inputs for domestic production. Often, a significant part of their export revenues is used to pay back their large foreign debt (Ayhan Kose, 2002). Finally, small developing countries dispose of very few resources and often the size of their markets is not sufficient for companies to produce at an efficient rate.
Bigstenal. (2004) concluded in case of African manufactures that as domestic markets are very small, if African countries are to industrialise, it will have to be through exports.
The view that an open trade regime is beneficial to the economic development of small developing countries has been based partly on neoclassical trade theory, which generally finds that countries with persistent high levels of protection appear to suffer significantly. Partly it is based on several empirical paper such as Sachs and Warner (1995) which find that trade liberalisation is beneficial to growth (Rutherford and Tarr, 1998). According to theory, by opening up its economy a small developing country should be able to raise aggregate welfare as depicted in Graph 1.
Autarky and free trade equilibria for a small developing country are compared: under autarky production the country realizes a level of aggregate utility which corresponds to the indifference curve Iaut and the production and consumption point is A. In free trade the production and consumption points are B and C, respectively. The country realizes a level of aggregate utility which corresponds to the indifference curve Itrade. Since the free trade indifference curve Itrade lies to the north east of the autarky indifference curve Iaut, national welfare rises as the small developing country moves to free trade (Krugman, 1999).
Domestic markets of small developing countries are too small for optimal scale in production to be achieved (Srinivasan and Chenery,1989, and Bigsten et al., 2004). Additionally, markets in developing countries apart from being small tend to be protected. This may lead either to a small number of firms in the market and a lack of competition. Consequently, resources are drawn into the domestic low-quality high-cost production with costs that are even higher as they would be as a result of the comparative disadvantage because producers take advantage of their monopolistic position. Or, it may be the case, that the number of firms is relatively large resulting in small-scale and inefficient production levels (Krueger, A.O., 1998).
However, by opening up it economy the low-cost producers can expand their level of production through exporting and they achieve economies of scale and economies of specialisation. Resources from the relatively inefficient non-trade sector may reallocate to the higher productive export sector (Giles and Williams, 2000). Further, free trade may generate new activities in line with the business opportunities existing in the world market (Cuadros et al., 2004).
Dynamic gains from trade are to arise from domestic industries producing more efficiently as they face foreign import competition (Bigsten et al., 2004). The firms have to improve their production processes as well as the quality of their products in order to remain competitive (Cuadros et al., 2004).
The beneficial effects of opening a small developing country to free trade are contentious as also the inconclusive evidence on the positive impact of openness on growth shows (Cuadros et al., 2004 and Srinivasan and Chenery,1989 and Rutherford and Tarr, 1998). There are several concerns regarding the opening up of a small developing country.
Firstly, the opening of the economy to world trade would make a small developing country more vulnerable because one of the major mechanisms underlying business cycle transmissions is trade. Output and price shocks are transmitted, generally from an importing country to an exporting country (Mansor, 2003).
Secondly, the opening up of the economy would inevitably have to take place at a relatively early stage in the economic development of a small developing country. It may well be that after opening the economy a trade deficit arises. In order to avoid inflation the consequent net flow of money into the economy would have to be absorbed and invested by economic structures, which at that stage might not have been developed yet (Krugman, 1999).
Thirdly, domestic industries may actually suffer from opening the economy to foreign competition, because of the specific higher costs they face at home. These put them at a dynamic disadvantage when competing against larger countries' firms. The costs are partly directly related to higher production costs by unit of output because of the small scale of the firms, although this disadvantage can be partially corrected when accessing export markets. But there are other costs that are related to the inadequacy of supply and the higher cost of non-tradable domestic inputs including finance services and skilled labour. Finally, there are higher transaction costs, especially in small islands or land- locked countries, as well as higher "unit" cost of public goods because of the non-divisibility of most public infrastructure (Cuadros et al., 2004). As a result, domestic producers and infant industries may be destroyed by import competition, and production may remain limited to its traditional sector of production which is the primary goods sector.
The dependence on exports of primary products and the resultant instability in export earnings leads to instability in GNP (Srinivasan and Chenery,1989). The latter increases risk and instability of investments in production of the local economy , and it is investments that are seen to be a major source of growth. Ayhan Kose (2002) found that roughly 88% of aggregate output fluctuations that can be explained by world prices shocks and these shocks are able to account for 90% of investment variation. Another consequence of unstable GNP is the level of tax revenues becoming unpredictable which makes it difficult for governments to commit themselves to long-run investments e.g. in education and health, which are important to long-term growth. Therefore, it has been argued that a small developing may be better advised to protect its infant industries and not to open entirely to free trade at least not at an early stage and this way it may be able to diversify from the production of primary products towards more skill and labour intensive products (Giles and Williams, 2000). However, these resources may not be available in a small developing country, or they may be drawn off the primary sector which may be at that stage the most important source of foreign exchange. It has been suggested that if small developing countries would allow their factor markets to operate efficiently and if they would reduce trade barriers than they might be able to move into more capital intensive and higher skilled production processes (Giles and Williams, 2000).
Barring effects of increased competition, positive externalities and permanent effects of trade liberalisation on productivity are also to arise through learning effects in both the export and the non-export producing sector of the economy (Srinivasan and Chenery,1989). When examining the manufacturing sector in Africa, Bigstenal. (2004) found learning-by exporting to be possible, and they suggest that large gains may arise for Africa from orientating its manufacturing sector towards exporting. By opening up its economy a small developing country has better access to advanced technologies (Giles and Williams, 2000) and to investments of multinational enterprises which seem to be the principal vehicle for the international transfer of technology (Cuadros et al., 2004). The subsequent higher rates of technological innovation as well as the gains accruing from learning by doing and the resulting improvement in production techniques is thought to increase long-run growth (Cuadros et al., 2004). Domestic enterprises also have the opportunity to learn from foreign enterprises about good management practices which may result in efficiency gains (Giles and Williams, 2000). However, there is little evidence that companies improve their efficiency as a result of learning-by-exporting, it may rather be the case that efficient companies self-select into the export market (Bigsten et al., 2004).
Generally if learning is to take place, domestic firms have to be established first to be able to compete. And FDI is only likely to contribute to economic growth if sufficient absorptive capacities for the advanced technologies exist in the domestic economy and it may even destroy industries in their early stages and prevent them from their learning. Further, learning does not take place at any rate, the benefits associated with inward investment seem to be contingent on a stable macroeconomic environment (Cuadros et al., 2004). Grossman and Helpman (1991) find in their model that whether trade promotes innovation in a small economy depends in particular on whether the economy 's resources are channelled towards activities that generate long run growth via externalities in R&D, expanding product variety, upgrading product quality etc. A distinction has to be made between investment in natural resources and in manufacturing, the latter offering more opportunities for learning to take place.
Another problem in developing countries is the existence of market failures such as technological externalities which are considered to be endemic to early stages of industrial developments (Lall, 1994). Domestic firms who, unlike multinational enterprises, have only a limited amount of resources at their disposal may be prevented from entering into activities with relatively difficult technologies.
Recapitulating, it takes a minimum levels of education and infrastructure for small developing countries to be able to benefit from opening up and if a country opens up its economy before these capacities have been build up, than it is likely to suffer from trade liberalisation.
In the process of opening the economy to trade, trade flows as well as capital flows are expected to increase. The revenues from exporting are likely to alleviate foreign exchange constraints and can thereby provide greater access to international markets (Cuadros et al., 2004 and Srinivasan and Chenery,1989) by facilitating the import of inputs in order to meet domestic demand, which in turn enables output expansion. The raise in import of more capital intensive goods including investment and intermediate goods may be conducive to economic growth. Resources that were deployed in the domestic relatively high-cost-production of capital intensive goods, are released and can be reallocated in the labour-intensive sector where the comparative advantage of the developing country lies. Hence, national income saved increases as capital intensive goods are less expensive and level of real investment rises as the prices of capital goods are lower (Krueger, 1998). Furthermore, revenues can be used for development as well as assistance with debt servicing (Giles and Williams, 2000).
However, despite the theoretical arguments concerning the gains from capital account openness that eventually comes along with trade liberalisation, the empirical evidence on whether it has in fact been conducive to growth is inconclusive (Cuadros et al., 2004, and Montiel and Serv  n, 2004). Opening the capital account may entail an increase in exposure and therefore in the potential vulnerability of the economies (Cuadros et al., 2004). When looking at the US and Malaysia, Mansor (2003) found that capital flows across borders provide the foundation for the transmission of monetary and asset price disturbances from a large country to a small country. Furthermore, Montiel and Serv  n (2004) found that in particular if the domestic institutional structure is defective, the costs in form of macro-economic risks are likely to outweigh the benefits.
Apart from giving better access to foreign capital, the integration with world financial markets may have benefits in that they force government to follow policies that create and maintain macroeconomic stability. Reason being that with the increased financial openness it is easier for investors to punish countries in response to perceptions that their macroeconomic policies are creating instabilities (Montiel and Serv  n, 2004). A stable macroeconomic policy features a fiscal stance consistent with fiscal solvency; a robust exchange-rate regime that avoids both systematic currency misalignment as well as excessive real exchange-rate volatility; and a monetary policy stance consistent with a low and stable rate of inflation (Krugman, 1999). All of the above measures help to create and maintain a predictable domestic macroeconomic environment which is important in the promotion of resource-allocation decisions, investment and growth (Montiel and Serv  n, 2004). And it seems to be that case that the effects of openness on economic performance are contingent on macroeconomic stability and on the existence of efficient institutions (Cuadros et al., 2004).
However, macroeconomic policies have to take account of the constraints in resources that are inherent to small sized developing countries. For instance, it is difficult for these countries to increase production subsequent to a devaluation and deflation simply because it does not dispose of many resources in the fist place (Krugman, 1999). Similarly, governments may have difficulties to deliver good governance because of a lack of resources such as human capital but also of funds. As to the latter, small developing countries generally rely heavily on international trade taxes for revenue generation and their trade regimes still include many exemptions, preferences and trade restrictive measures (Cuadros et al., 2004). Since trade liberalisation involves reductions in tariff rates, these countries experience a decrease in the share of international trade taxes in government revenues. However, the volume increase in imports thus the wider import tax base and the consequent revenues may in fact more than compensate the direct effect of the lower tariff rates and lower real exchange rate on trade revenues. And trade liberalisation may even enhance revenues in that the simplification of tariff structures, together with the lowering of tariffs, may reduce the incidence of evasion. Furthermore, lower rates and simpler tariff structures are easier to administer and tend to be more efficient and more transparent (Cuadros et al., 2004).
Whether opening up the economy to trade actually leads to growth in a small developing country depends on a variety of factors. Most importantly the process has to be accompanied by macroeconomic policies aiming at long-term stability. This would impart trust to foreign investors who then may convey technology and capital into the country so that learning and efficiency gains take place. Furthermore, the country has to dispose of reasonably well-functioning factor markets and basic capacities in the first place, in order to be able to take advantage of the positive effects that accrue from free trade and capital flows.
Hence, the conclusion is that opening up the economy creates opportunities for a small developing to improve its economic situation and to generate growth, however, its success is conditional on certain circumstances that have to be created before or in the course of the opening process.
