Intonation has been a wide and common topic in the study of English phonology. Different from segmental phonology such as the study of phonemes and syllables, intonation belongs to, as well as stress, suprasegmental phonology (Roach 2000). It is a complicated system in English which plays an essential role in the use of language and it sometimes may imply more information beyond the real speech rather than be a byproduct of the utterance. For accurately describing the intonation system, various analysis systems and notations have been used which often have their own advantages and disadvantages. This essay will basically introduce two of the analysis systems - the traditional British analysis of English intonation presented by Peter Roach (2000) and the relatively new notation system ToBI used widely in the U.S.; furthermore, it attempts to evaluate the benefits and drawbacks of those two systems by a comparison between them.
Following the framework of intonation in Roach (2000), the concepts of tone and tone unit are generally acceptable. Tone is a general tendency of the change of the pitch and tones are identified to have effects in utterance as a group rather than separate tones in an intonation language such as English (Roach 2000). Thus this sort of group is called tone unit which can be defined as 'a stretch of speech identified as the domain of a unit of intonation' (Mathews 1997: 379).
Starting with this sentence, it is easy to identify the outstanding syllable know with falling tone which is considered as the core in this tone unit and the name for the prominent syllable is tonic syllable (TS) (Roach 2000) in this tone unit, or nucleus such as in Cruttenden (1997) and Gimson (1994). An additional note is that the tone symbol in Roach (2000) is on the lower left of the syllable, but it will be placed on the upper left due to a technical shortage in the computer system. However, it will not affect the presentation of the essential theory.
Other possible components in this tone unit are the head (H), pre-head (PH) and tail (T). The head means a group of syllables starting with the first stressed syllables until, not including, the tonic syllable (Crystal 1969) and it refers to people here marked with the stressed label ' '. The preceding part before the head until is easily speculated as a pre-head; however, any part before tonic syllables is also called a pre-head when no head in the tone unit. Finally, the rest part behind the tonic syllable in the tone unit is called a tail which is you in the example and '     ' is the symbol to shown stressed syllables in the tail. Usually there is only one tonic syllable in a tone unit, according to Roach (2000).
As for the identification of the boundary of tone units, Roach (2000: 166) summarizes two different sorts. One is a pause-type boundary (||) caused by silent pauses in the speech and the other is a non-pause boundary (|) which is less obvious than the former one.
There are mainly five tones in tone units, respectively, the level, rising, falling, fall-rise and rise-fall tones. In a level tone, the tonic syllable is usually identified the prominent syllable due to no tone movement as claimed by Roach (2000: 177). Examples of other tones (Roach 2000: 168-9 and 172-3) can be seen as below: (2) rising (3) falling.
In these two simple situations, the intonation steps up like (2) or down like (3) from the tonic syllable why to the tail. (4) fall-rise (5) rise-fall (4) and (5) indicates more complicated tone units with the fall-rise and rise-fall tones where the tone is only completed half on the tonic syllable and continues to spread through the tail; furthermore, the intonation reaches the top or the bottom of the tone in the middle of the sentence rather than in the tonic syllable itself.
The final part introduced in Roach 's book (2000) is about the high head and the low head. The high head usually has a higher pitch in the stressed syllables than the starting pitch of the tonic syllable (shown in ' '); differently, a low head often has a lower pitch (shown in ' ') than the starting pitch in a falling tone, but keeps the same pitch as the beginning of a rising tone as in (6) and (7) (Roach 2000: 256 and 174). (6) with high head a. b. (7) with low head a. b.
It may be noticed that only the situation with one stressed syllable in a head was discussed and the parts of the head except the stressed syllable keep the same pitch such as in (6a), (6b), (7a) and (7b). However, in a head with more than one stressed syllables, the stressed syllables have a step-up or a step-down tendency to get close the beginning pitch of the tonic syllable like (8) and (9). A little difference is in the situation (9a) where the pitches in a low head will not raise up. (8) with high head a. b. (9) with low head a. b.
So far, the intonation system introduced in Roach (2000) has been very generally represented in former paragraphs and from now on another system for describing the intonation called ToBI (Tone and Break Index) is going to be introduced in the following section.
As a kind of autosegmental approach to the intonation system, ToBI is originated by Pierrehumbert (1980: 87 in Cruttenden 1997) and used mostly in the American academic research. It applies only two tones, High (H) and Low (L) to the analysis and presents a quite new view of the intonation system. It is necessary to introduce five types of symbols used in ToBI (Cruttenden 1997: 60):
Other symbols such as '   ' (shown as 'H   ' and 'L   ') and '%' (shown as 'H%' and 'L%') represents namely 'pause-type' boundary (||) and 'non-pause' boundary (|) as they are mentioned in Roach (2000); however, '   ' can occur before both boundaries and '%' only appears before the 'pause-type' boundary (Cruttenden 1997).
Therefore, if the tone unit (2) is analyzed in ToBI, it may be like this. (2) (10).
After the rough introduction of both systems, the advantages and disadvantages of each can be noticed with a comparison between them. 1. The application of different notations usually conveys a direct impression to readers. Undeniably, the symbols such as ' ', ' ' and ' ' do provide a simple and visual guidance for the readers of course with appropriate explanation but are quite difficult to type in computers. Contrarily, ' * ' ' ! ', ' % ', etc. are quite meaningless and abstract codes which are difficult, especially, for learners to remember, which is also agreed by Roach (2000) and (Cruttenden 1997); however, the system is easy to be used in computers. 2. For the attempt to describe the natural speech, the Roach 's system seems to have more limitation than ToBI. One is the analysis on more than one tone movement in a tone unit. Roach generally summarizes five situations as mentioned above; nevertheless, the natural intonation system is not as simple as Roach 's generalization. Considering the following example (11) indicated in ToBI system by Cruttenden (1997: 63), it is difficult to use Roach 's system to analyze the tone unit. (11).
According to Roach (2000), there is only one tone movement carried by the tonic syllable, so the part from did n't to to should be considered as a low head if go is the tonic syllable. Thus there should be no tone movement before the tonic syllable carrying a rising tone such as (9a), but it does not make sense in (11). The possible solution is either to admit the existence of more than one tonic syllable in a tone unit, as the problem raised by Roach himself (2000: 178) or to divide (11) into three tone units but it will looks quite farfetched.
Another limitation is to analyze the detail in a rising or a falling pitch movement, for instance, the high fall and low fall. As shown in the example (4) where might carries a falling tone, one may still fail to deduce the correct pitch height of might because the symbol ' ' does not indicate whether a high fall or a low fall although Roach used '   ' once to indicate the full rise (Roach 2000: 155). In contrast, ToBI has a connatural merit from its simple structure that it is more flexible to describe different levels of the pitch height. So a high fall and a low fall can be illustrated presented as H*L-L% and !H*L-L% in tone units (Cruttenden 1997: 63).
Hence, ToBI seems able to be applied more successfully and extensively in the description of intonation in R.P., G.A. and Australian English (Cruttenden 1997) although it has not been applied very well into all the intonation systems in a statistic result (Ohio State University Department of Linguistics 2004). 3. With the drawback in Roach 's system discssed above, it still had the benefit of its simple generalization about the intonation because it provided a comparatively clear profile of the real system with straightforward notations and established an easy access to the complicated intonation system, at least for the learners. Nonetheless, ToBI focuses on a full-scale description and makes it a little difficult to summarize the analysis results and point out the outline of the whole system.
To sum up, this essay outlined the whole structure of English intonation by comparison between the traditional analysis system used in Roach (2000) and the ToBI system widely used in America. The traditional system, based on the concepts of tones and units, is easy to read and understand with the use of visual symbols and can provide rather primary and clear contour about the whole system although it may fail to analyze some phenomena in the changeful reality and the inconvenience in the computer input process. In contrast, the flexible system ToBI may succeed to track detailed information occurring in speech and give a comparatively accurate description; however, there are many abstract symbols requiring adequate comprehension although it is simple for computer operation. Therefore, if the first system is supposed to be easy for a general introduction and fundamental learning, then the second one is more suitable for advanced research to certain extent; nevertheless, they both have limitation in different aspects.
There are still other ways of describing the natural speech and will be more; inevitably those methods will probably have their own merits and shortcomings in different aspects as well. However, with the continuous development in intonation research, the true face of this complicated and attractive system will be unfolded one day.
