In this essay, I will begin by defining what a 'phonological process' is. I will then look at phonological processes in more detail, discussing their use in language acquisition and examining the various factors influencing phonological processes before evaluating the theory of phonological processes as a whole.
Within language acquisition, Ingram (1989) writes that there are three common theories of child language perception and production. Global perception theory, which suggests the child cannot perceive many adult speech sounds and so uses their own system of language. Complete perception theory which suggests the child can perceive all adult forms and that variations in pronunciation are due to the child 's production ability not being as developed as its perception ability and partial perception theory which suggests the child can perceive all but the most difficult sounds. Stampe (1979) writes that there is "abundant evidence that the child 's representations closely conform to adult speech" and that this claim is "essential" to the theory of phonological processes. Furthermore, he writes the "no evidence whatsoever" has been advanced to suggest that child has a phonetic system of its own. These statements show that Stampe is clearly taking a complete perception stance in relation to the theory of phonological processes. Furthermore, the global perception theory is being rejected outright.
Stampe (1979) states that "A phonological process is a mental operation that applies in speech to substitute, for a class of sounds or sound sequences presenting a specific common difficulty to the speech capacity of the individual" and that "A phonological process merges a potential phonological opposition into that member of the opposition which least tries the restrictions of the human speech capacity". What Stampe is suggesting is that when a child is unable to produce a sound, they will employ some form of substitution to the word to make it producible. However, Stampe is keen to stress "These substitutes are not merely random or occasional, but are regular and unexceptional in the child 's speech." It is also important to note, that Stampe believes children do not use phonological processes because of a physical inability to create a sound, but rather due to a mental inability. As he writes "It is not uncommon to produce a sound correctly at first and later submit it to substitution" which suggests the child is physically able to make the sound.
A similar view to the theory of phonological processes was put forward by smith (1973) who proposed a set of "realisation rules" for explaining 'errors' in his sons speech. Smith writes these rules are "strictly ordered and any adult form will be subject to any rules which is applicable" This viewpoint differs slightly from Stampe (1979) who writes "different children acquire sounds and sound-patterns in quite different orders" although he does admit "This is not to deny that certain orders of acquisition are fixed" Even Smith (1973) later admits "there are a few exceptions". This would seem to suggest that there are some aspects of variation between children that phonological processes and complete perception theory as a whole cannot account for, but I shall return to this point later.
Writing in Fletcher and MacWinney (1995), Menn and Stoel-Gammon state that "In several ways children 's words carry less phonological information that the corresponding adult targets" This would seem to suggest that in order to communicate, the child is changing the adult form into a form that they can produce. Menn and Stoel-Gammon agree and also suggest that "children usually have systematic ways" of reducing these forms. Stampe (1979) writes that children have an "innate phonological system" and that the child 's task in acquiring adult pronunciation is to "revise all aspects of the system which separate his pronunciation from the standard" and that this is done by removing those phonological processes that are not compatible with the adult form.
There are three main categories of phonological processes identified by Ingram in Fletcher and Garman (1986) that the child may use to simplify the adult form to aid with production. Due to the space constraints of this essay, I will not go into detail, or attempt to list each one but I feel a brief summary of some common Phonological processes would be beneficiary to help understand the ways in which children change their production of speech using phonological processes.
Ingram writing in Fletcher and Garman (1986), states that often a child will substitute the accepted adult sound for a different type of sound. In Fletcher and Garman, Ingram summarises the various types of substitution processes as the following.
Ingram defines stopping as when "fricatives and occasionally other sounds, are replaced with a stop consonant" an example of this would be if a word like '(f)eel' was pronounced '(p)eel'. An important point about stopping that Ingram notes is that "While stopping is common, the actual patterns of its application by individual children are not". This is interesting, as again it suggests a large amount of variation between each child 's language acquisition which would seem to favour the global perception theory of language acquisition.
Ingram defines fronting as when "Velar and palatal consonants tend to be replaced with alveolar ones" examples of which would be if '(c)ar' was pronounced '(t)ar' or if '(Sh)oe' was pronounced  'su'. Ingram also makes that point that often children may front velar consonants but not palatal consonants or vice-versa. Furthermore children may also combine fronting with stopping such as if '(j)am' was pronounced '(d)am'. Yet again, this demonstrates the individual variation between children.
Ingram defines gliding as when "a glide [w] or [j] is substituted for a liquid sound, i.e. [l] or [r]" an example of which would be if '(r)ed' was pronounced '(w)ed'. Ingram comments that English children substitute glides very differently to French children. He then suggests that "the substitutions used in phonological processes may be highly influenced by the child 's phonological system, not just by universal tendencies".
Writing in Fletcher and Garman (1986) Ingram states that children often have "tendencies to assimilate one segment in a word to another". This is known as an assimilatory process. In Fletcher and Garman, Ingram summaries the various types of assimilatory processes as follows.
Ingram writes that "consonants tend to be voiced when preceding a vowel, and devoiced at the end of a syllable" This can be illustrated with the example given by Ingram of '(p)i(g)' being pronounced '(b)i(k)'.
Similar to the point discussed in 2.12 Ingram says that voicing of prevocalic consonants has only been documented as occurring in English. This suggests a child 's phonological inventory may have an influence on its phonological processes.
Ingram writes that consonants often assimilate to a neighbouring consonant in predictable ways. This can occur when a consonant assimilates to a velar or labial consonant as well as when a nasal consonant denasalizes in the neighbourhood of a non-nasal consonant.
Ingram states that there are "specific phonological processes which are directly motivated by the tendency of young children to simplify syllable structure" and that most children aim for a basic consonant-vowel syllable structure. Writing in Fletcher and Garman, Ingram summarises the following syllable structure processes.
Ingram defines cluster reduction as when "A consonant cluster is reduced to a single consonant". Examples of this are given as when 'play' is pronounced 'pe' and 'train' is pronounced 'tren'.
Ingram also states that this is one of the most commonly observed processes in children and that not only is it predictable, but also the "direction of deletion" is, in most cases predictable.
This shows that this process at least, is highly regular. This would therefore be a very strong example of Stampe 's definition of a phonological process.
Ingram defines this process as when "a CVC (consonant-vowel-consonant) syllable is reduced to a CV (consonant-vowel) by deleting the final consonant". Ingram gives examples of this as when 'bib' is pronounced 'bi' and bike is pronounced 'bai'.
Ingram states that this process is when "an unstressed syllable is deleted, especially if it precedes a stressed syllable". An example of this is given as when 'potato' is pronounced 'dedo'.
Ingram states reduplication is when "In a multisyllabic word, the initial CV syllable is repeated". Examples of this include when 'cookie' is pronounced 'gigi' and when 'daddy' is pronounced 'dada'.
Ingram states that this is an early process and as such is lost relatively early in the child 's development. Ingram also makes the comment that "children vary greatly in their tendencies to reduplicate". This is again showing the variation between individual children, suggesting that reduplication processes of this kind are often not easily predictable.
Within various languages there is a huge amount of variation between what constitutes a recognisable member of a language 's phonological inventory and therefore a large variation between the various sounds that occur in each language.
Stampe (1979) writes "non-occurrence of certain sounds in the underlying representation of a language is attributed to a process in the phonological system of the language". What Stampe is suggesting is that there are variations in phonological processes between languages and that these are due to variation in the phonological system of the language used.
Writing in Fletcher and Garman (1986) Ingram suggests that an example of this is denalisation which Ingram defines as when "a nasal consonant will denasalize in the neighbourhood of a non-nasal consonant". Denasalisation is very rarely found in English but is very common in French children. Ingram writes that in English, there is a tendency to have initial stress of a word, where as in French there is not. Ingram therefore concludes that "a specific language may have phonological characteristics that bring out certain processes". As well as the examples given in this essay (2.12 and 2.21), this example seems to agree with Stampe in that both believe children 's phonological processes are influenced by the characteristics of the language they speak.
Stampe (1979) states that phonological processes are either context free or context sensitive. Stampe writes that context free processes "respond to the inner complexities of single segments" whereas context sensitive processes "respond to the complexities of sequences of segments".
This is summarised well by Menn and Stoel-Gammon writing in Fletcher and MacWinney (1995) who write context free rules "apply to a given sound or class of sound in all cases" while in context sensitive processes (or context dependant processes as Menn and Stoel-Gammon call them) "the fate of the target sound depends on its position in the word or syllable and/or on other sounds in the word".
To illustrate these types of processes Menn and Stoel-Gammon give two examples. The first is when the child replaces all adult /l/ 's with /w/. Here, the process is only concerned with /l/ and /w/ and none of the other segments around it. Furthermore, as this happens in all cases it is a context free process. The second example is when 'cookie' is pronounced 'tUki'. This is an example of when velars are produced accurately except when found in word initial position, when they are replaced by alveolars. This is an example of a context sensitive (context dependant) process as the process is clearly influenced by the surrounding segments.
One more point Menn and Stoel-Gammon make is that context dependant processes are much more common than context free ones. This would seem to suggest the child is n't simply learning the sounds of adult speech but also how they are combined in sequence. Menn and Stoel-Gammon acknowledge this and write "we consider children as learning to master adult sound sequences as well as adult sounds". Furthermore, this is proved by the observation that "a child may well be able to make all the individual sounds in a sequence, yet be unable to combine them and produce the sequence itself.".
Through-out this essay, I have given several examples of cases of variation between children. This is the most obvious and main criticism of the phonological processes theory - the fact that the theory seems to underestimate the influence of individual variation between children.
Writing in Fletcher and Garman (1986), Ingram suggests that phonological processes fail to take into account the influence of the phonological preferences of the child. Ingram defines a phonological preference as "a preference by the child for a specific articulatory pattern" such as class (fricative, nasal etc) or syllable structure (reduplication etc.). Ingram goes on to note that a child may also be influenced by factors such as the place of a sound in a word, or may even avoid using a sound they are unable to produce rather than attempt to modify it by a phonological process. As a result, Ingram states "the output from child to child may be quite different".
However, Ingram also states that "some children keep very close to adult models and use only the most familiar phonological processes" if this is the case for the majority of children (Ingram notes there has not been enough research to conclude if this is the case) then it may be the phonological processes theory holds correct for the majority of children, although it must still acknowledge that some variation exists.
Stampe (1979) does make some attempt to account for this variation, suggesting that "where processes overlap" the child will attempt to either suppress or limit a certain process which he then claims is what leads to individual variation. Ingram (1989) writes that this claim is "one of Stampe 's major ways of accounting for individual variation between children". The problem with this idea is that it still does n't explain why one child limits a certain process that another child may suppress entirely. Indeed by admitting individual variation but being unable to account for it in a way that the idea of phonological preferences can would seem to give support to the global perception theory discussed earlier.
It would however be foolish not to acknowledge the relevance of Stampe 's phonological processes as common across child acquisition. Ingram (1989) writes that "general patterns do occur" and Smith (1979) states that 97% of A`s vocabulary can be explained by his realisation rules, although concedes that there are exceptions where "the rules make the wrong predictions".
Other theories such as Macken and Ferguson recounted in Ingram (1989) have suggested that making predictions of language acquisition based on a phonological theory of the adult language is not the best approach to take. Instead, they emphasise individual variation across children. This criticism of Stampe 's theory does n't seem to hold up to close scrutiny. It is quite obvious that when acquiring language the child 's goal is to emulate adult speech and therefore a method that evaluates child language in terms of the adult language system (such as Stampe 's) would be preferable. Furthermore although I have already shown a problem of the phonological processes theory is the lack of acknowledgement of individual variation between children, I have also shown that there are general patterns that are common across children. Therefore it would not seem correct to view the child 's acquisition solely in this way.
In this essay, I have outlined the phonological processes theory, demonstrated how the a child acquiring language would use it taking into account various influences such as the child 's first language, explained Stampe 's distinction between context free and context sensitive processes and provided an evaluation of main problem of the theory - the idea that it does n't take the individual variation of the child into account.
In the previous section, I showed that although the phonological processes theory does not entirely explain how children acquire language it does give a large amount of insight into a child 's language acquisition.
The main critique of this theory is that it is too limiting in its approach. Writing in Fletcher and Garman (1986) Ingram suggests that the idea that a child 's form is made up only of the adult form with phonological processes is unable to explain the massive variation between and immense complexity of children 's acquisition of language. Ingram suggests that a better approximation is the adult form with the phonological processes but with the addition of the child 's spoken form. He argues that it is important to acknowledge that children "actively operate on adult forms" based on the discussion in this essay, I would agree. Furthermore, writing in Fletcher and MacWinney (1995), Menn and Stoel-Gammon also acknowledge "the child must construct its own version of the adult system for word pronunciation".
What this leads me to conclude is that although the theory of phonological processes (and complete perception theory as whole) is too narrow in its approach to child language acquisition, the same can be said for approaches within global perception theory. However, as both theories have important points to make it would seem the best theory of language acquisition would rest somewhere within the partial perception theory school of thought.
