To accomplish a natural-sounding intonation is often the most difficult challenge for adult learners of English. To describe the intricacies of English intonation in a clear, logical way should therefore be paramount in any notation system. Peter Roach 's (1991) framework, the classical choice in most classes of English intonation in Europe, will be described in section 2 of this paper. In section 3, Roach 's notation system will be compared to that of David Brazil (1994), who focuses in his work on the function of intonation. The critical analysis of advantages and disadvantages of each system put forward will concentrate on coherence and clarity as parameters for evaluation.
Roach describes intonation as a linguistically significant change of voice pitch, i.e. the pitch change has to be perceptible and under the speaker 's control (Roach 1991:133-134). Pitch is usually described as being 'high' or 'low' to varying extents, but it should be noted that in the context of intonation these terms only refer to the relative 'height' of pitch within the speaker 's individual pitch range.
The first essential concept Roach uses in his description of intonation is that of an 'utterance', "a continuous piece of speech beginning and ending with a clear pause" (Roach 1991:134). An utterance consists of one or more 'tone-units', the borderlines of which are sometimes hard to determine. Often a return to a particular pitch level or a break of speech rhythm marks the beginning of a new tone unit, but these are only guidelines that do not always apply in natural speech (Roach 1991:159). The tone-unit can be further divided into 'pre-head' (the part before the first stressed syllable), 'head' (the part from the first stressed syllable of the tone-unit to the beginning of the tonic syllable), 'tonic syllable' and 'tail' (the part after the tonic syllable and before the end of the tone-unit). The most important of these is the tonic syllable, which is usually perceived as having the highest degree of prominence of all stressed syllables in the tone-unit, because it carries the 'tone' of the tone-unit (Roach 1991:145). Each tone-unit has only one tonic syllable (In fact this only applies to  'simple' tone-units, but as a treatment of 'compound' tone-units would exceed the time and space limitations of this essay, this simplification is necessary). By 'tone' is meant the type of pitch movement that is performed in a particular tone-unit. Roach distinguishes between 5 different tones: 'fall', 'rise', 'level', 'fall-rise' and 'rise-fall'.
Level tones, i.e. tones in which the pitch stays on the same level for the whole of the tone-unit are not very common in English and are perceived as being unnatural (Roach 1991: 135), or expressing boredom. Falling tones, which descend from a higher to a lower pitch level, are much more frequently used in English and leave the perceiver with an impression of 'finality' (Roach 1991:138). A rising tone on the other hand gives an impression of openness, thus it typically occurs at the end of questioning utterances. Tone-units with a fall-rise tone are slightly less frequent, but commonly used in English to express an attitude that might best be described as a sense of "limited agreement". Quite rare is the rise-fall, often dubbed the "gossiping" tone, as it conveys a sense of surprise, or of intense approval or disapproval (Roach 1991:139). Much more could be said on the functions of different tones in different environments, but as this essay is mainly concerned with form and notation, the above sketchings will have to suffice.
What has to be mentioned however is the way the pitch changes over the different syllables of a tone-unit, because the tonic syllable is not the only significant place in terms of pitch. The head of the tone-unit can be either high or low, too, meaning higher or respectively lower in pitch than the beginning of the tonic syllable (Roach 1991:154-155). One of the more complicated issues, especially in terms of notation, is how the tone is spread over the syllables of a polysyllabic utterance. For although it is traditionally said that the tonic syllable carries the tone, in case there is a tail, i.e. syllables following the tonic syllable, the tone spreads to the end of the tone unit. In falling and rising tones, the downwards or respectively upward movement begun on the tonic syllable continues step by step with each following syllable until the borders of the speaker 's individual pitch range are reached. If there are still other syllables remaining, they are continued at the borderline pitch reached at the end of the progressive movement (Roach 1991:149). If a fall-rise occurs in a tone-unit with a tail, the falling movement takes place on the tonic syllable and then the pitch remains low until the rise occurs on the last stressed syllable of the tone-unit, or on the very last syllable of the unit in case there is no stressed syllable in the tail. The reverse happens in rise-fall tone-units with a tail (Roach 1991:153).
Roach marks pauses, i.e. the boundaries between utterances like this:
Tone unit boundaries are indicated by:
Underlining identifies tonic syllables:
The tone is indicated by a symbol right before the tonic syllable. In Roach these appear in superscript, but for technical reasons they will be written in subscript in this essay. ` fall Example:    rise Example:    level Example:    rise-fall Example:
Stressed syllables in the head are preceded by one of the symbols below, depending on whether they are high or low. ' high head Example:    low head Example:
Stressed syllables in the tail are preceded by this symbol:     Example:
Extra pitch height, as sometimes found in emphatic utterances, is marked by the following symbol preceding the particular syllable and the tone symbol:     extra pitch height Example:
Roach acknowledges that more detailed notations of pitch movement and height is possible, but argues that it would not be profitable to do so (Roach 1991:142).
David Brazil 's objective is to help advanced learners of English to achieve a greater proficiency in intonation, particularly to avoid misunderstandings in communication. Therefore his approach aims to be very applied and functional. Like Roach, he starts by breaking speech up into pieces called 'tone units' (Brazil 1994:7). However, the symbol he uses for tone-unit boundaries is different from Roach 's: //.
The above symbol certainly leaves a stronger impression of segregation through its "doubled" character than Roach 's simple '|'. One could argue that a double character does not make sense if there is no simple version of it, perhaps marking a less "important" boundary. But as Brazil does not introduce another borderline concept, neither "stronger" nor "weaker" than the tone-unit boundary, his choice might be justified by the nature of the publication, a student handbook. To have a bold notation might make the issue easier to grasp.
Instead of splitting the tone unit up in pre-head, head, tonic syllable and tail, Brazil only differentiates between the tonic syllable and other 'prominent' syllables. He defines 'prominent syllables' simply by stating that they are "more noticeable than the others" (Brazil 1994:8). Prominent syllables are marked by upper-case letters:
The tonic syllable, which he describes as being noticeable in a different way, for example a fall in pitch (Roach 1991:9), is marked by underlining:
Brazil points out that if there is only one prominent syllable in the tone-unit, it must be the tonic syllable.
The tones he introduces are 'falling', 'rising' and 'fall-rise'. The fact that the 'level' and 'rise-fall' tones are not included in the discussion (they are merely mentioned in the final summary) is understandable considering they are not as common and therefore not a vital issue for Brazil 's handbook. A useful distinction, very much in line with his functional approach, is his division in proclaiming tone (fall) and referring tones (rise, and fall-rise), the members of the latter group referring back to knowledge shared by speaker and hearer to different extents (Brazil 1994:33).
As indicators of tone, Brazil introduces diagonal arrows:
However, these arrows are not placed directly in front of the tonic syllable like Roach 's tone symbols; instead they are positioned right at the beginning of the tone-unit, succeeding the tone-unit boundary symbol:
This might be a rather unfortunate choice, especially for long tone-units. Having an arrow pointing downwards right at the beginning of a tone-unit is likely to confuse some students as to where the fall in pitch actually occurs, which is towards the opposite end of the tone-unit in most cases. It may not be a huge cognitive obstacle because the place of pitch change is marked by underlining, but certainly it is slightly less convenient than Roach 's system.
A good choice on the other hand is the elision of terminology that is not essential for the purposes of the handbook. Without introducing the terms 'pre-head', 'head' and 'tail', Brazil still manages to convey effectively how and where, apart from the tonic syllable, intonation takes place in the tone unit. He points out that the tone begins on the last prominent syllable and is continued over the remainder of the tone-unit (Brazil 1994:20, 36), and although he does not talk about 'high head' and 'low head', he works with the notion of 'key'. It is noteworthy however, that instead of the dichotomous parameter Roach applies (a 'head' is either 'high' or 'low'), Brazil assumes a default 'mid key', the literally "un-marked" key. For 'low key' he places a downward arrow, for 'high key', i.e. "raised pitch level" (Brazil 1994:88), he places an upward arrow in front of the first prominent syllable:
The notion of a default mid key seems to make more sense than a binary system, not only because it eases the learner 's understanding but also in terms of correspondence to reality. Nevertheless, the key notation clarifies the problem with Brazil 's choice for the position of his tone-indicating symbol that was mentioned previously. In the example above, the downward tone movement is indicated before the upward key arrow, which is a misrepresentation of reality. Furthermore, to notate both key and tone by the means of arrows might lead to confusion. It is also unclear why Brazil chooses to have the key symbol directly preceding the relevant syllable, while not applying the same principle to the tonic syllable.
Both Roach and Brazil claim for their books to be practical courses. There are obvious differences in terms of the volume of issues covered and the depth of theoretical detail, but these differences are entailed by the difference in the authors' objectives. Whereas Roach aims to give a theoretical background encompassing all major areas of "English Phonetics and Phonology", Brazil 's goal is to help foreign learners of English to communicate with greater proficiency. It is in the light of these objectives that the frameworks discussed in this paper and their notation systems must be evaluated.
Brazil 's reduction of terminology is certainly beneficial for his very applied course, and even though some of his notation lacks coherency and system, his framework is much quicker to grasp and concentrates on the vital information. Roach 's notation on the other hand is a well-balanced compromise between including more information and keeping the utterances legible. In conclusion it has to be said that both course books serve the goals stated in their introductions well, albeit Roach 's notation seems to be slightly more comprehensively designed.
