The main issue of vocabulary development for researchers studying Child Language nowadays and during many years in the past is to try to know how and how fast children can acquire words and their meanings in their native language (we will focus on the English language) and also logically what the limits to that acquisition are (correct sound, approximate concept...). We know that the most and most important part of it happens during the first years of the childhood, that is to say during the preschool years (from the first months of the life of a child until he/she is about three years old)) when linguists like Rice notice a rapid vocabulary development also known as " Spurt " after Barrett, when children learn in average eight to ten words a day. Still, words -or sounds associated with concepts and meanings- require phonological processes by progression and stages to be acquired.
First come the phases of comprehension followed later by production, studied by Benedict in 1979, when the child begins to formulate his thoughts. After appear the child 's first words or babbling that we could compare to an imitation of adult language but with no real concept (for instance a child can articulate what seems to be word, a syllable as 'gig' but it is related to anything in particular). Then once the word is known correctly enough, the child has to get its meaning (Clark, 1973). It is during that phase that there is a predominance of specific classes or categories of words in the child 's lexicon (like nouns of objects ('table') or persons ('mummy')are preferred to concepts of actions).
The acquisition of language is complex because of several parameters such as the child 's personal abilities to learn language (e.g. the SLI or impaired children who have innate difficulties in learning words) . It also depends on the context in which the child learns and his or her existing knowledge of the language ( grammar, lexicon...), all that influenced by cultural and social factors that make greater differences between the children.
But as a whole, vocabulary learning follows a sort of scheme leading the child from babbling to real meaning and from gestures to words. Thus, linguists have noticed a considerable development with robust abilities to map new words. The child first learns them as a procedure to simplify his/her speech and to be understood ; for instance, once they expose him/her to a new word, he/she under extends it : one single word corresponds to one particular example (Reich, 1976), to get later to a prototype word or central concept of a word attached with specific characteristics, after Rosch 's Prototype theory in 1978, and finally on the opposite, overextends it (the child names several different things linked with a far root with a single word, e.g. 'bird' for 'penguin' etc, after Bowerman, in 1978). But the question here is, does the child need multiple exposures to start acquiring the meaning of a word? Or on the contrary can he/she get it quickly and in a little time as tend to prove the " Fast Mapping " and " Quick Incidental Learning (QUIL) theories? Let 's introduce and analyse them.
First, we need to know some generalities about the learning of new words by children : once the child recognizes an object, he/she attributes some properties that are representative of it and then labels it (e.g. 'dog' is characterized by four legs, hairs, barking...); but how fast can he/she achieve such a complex process?.
Before the theories we are going to present, it was said that " children needed several exposures to a new word to start acquiring the meaning " of it. But the experiments led by Carey and Bartlett in 1978 somewhat prove the contrary.
Indeed, the theory of " Fast Mapping " shows that an 'initial quick and incomplete comprehension of a new word 's meaning (a form of understanding) can take place on basis of only a few exposures'. Its role is to help children to acquire some vocabulary more rapidly and prove that he/she has abilities to do so.
Hence the first study experienced by Carey and Bartlett exposed few children of pre-school age to objects like trays or cups of different colours each : two were known colours (blue and red) and the other one introduced a new colour " chromium " that the child heard for the first time there. In this context, the linguists asked the children to 'bring [them] the chromium tray or cup' (that is to say the new concept) in contrast with the blue and red ones. By a logical and still unconscious reasoning the children deduced that this new colour was neither blue nor red and so brought the dark green or 'chromium' object : an explicit explanation was not necessary for him/her to understand what the linguists meant. After several weeks and exposures to the new word, the children knew something about it without all the same totally controlling and distinguishing its full meaning.
If we analyse the results of this experiment, the general idea we get is that to go from comprehension to real production of the word is still a slow and hard process and that several exposures to a new word are still required before it is spontaneously produced.
Moreover, there are limits to this fast mapping : the child recognizes the word only in a contrasted context, which is helpful, because he/she can draw a parallel between known and new words. Yet, though we state a slow and partial mastery of a word 's learning, we also note a partial sense of it and the possibility for the child to use it casually in his/her vocabulary.
Let 's introduce now another theory of child mapping : the " Quick Incidental Learning " or QUIL, which is a process to show that children own even more robust abilities to map new words, or in other words, a sort of speedy process of Fast Mapping.
This new theory developed by Rice and Woodsmall in 1988 is opposed to a 'forced acquisition' (e.g. at school, children have to learn from adults and books written on that purpose...). The main idea of that theory was that in natural conditions, a child can learn more! In addition to that, they did not need a contrasted setting like the experiment below and this 'technique' was clear and required only a few exposures to the new word(s), that is to say that the environmental supports for mapping were minimal.
The basis of the experience to prove all that was a video stimulus : children aged from 3 to 5 in front of television, watched animated stories (cartoons or child programs of twelve minutes each) in which a new word occurred incidentally five times during a six to seven minutes period. The child was thus a passive viewer of ongoing information and unconsciously matched them. The words which were introduced were known to be totally new to the children that watched TV. They were of several grammatical categories and they were like complex terms for already known concepts : objects (e.g. : 'gramophone' for 'record'), actions ( 'sever' instead of 'cut'), attributes ('malicious' for 'bad') and affective states (with for instance 'jubilation' for 'happiness'). Once the subjects had viewed all the videos, the linguists submitted them to a comprehension test in order to analyse how fast they were able to understand and then produce the words they had just learnt.
So once again, if we analyse the results of the experiments, it is clear that we face an incidental learning : the child can obviously learn enough about a new word from relative brief, non-tutorial experience (no adult reference or assistance is required). On a more detailed analyse, we also notice that experimental words are acquired, but this result varies with the type of word to learn : a predominance of nouns (objects, persons, animals...) and attributes is clear; they are better controlled than actions for instance. This leads to deduce that there is a progression in that acquisition (first the child will learn and use nouns, then actions, then modifier and lastly affective states), like in the Fast Mapping theory where assimilated words were only objects or attribute labels.
All in all, those two theories, though different, both prove that mainly, before one and half years old the child, whatever happens, is a " slow mapper " and that the more he/she grows, the faster he maps new word (in addition of course to the richer inventory of words the oldest owns) of specific categories. Finally, individual differences still exist and influence their lexical acquisition (social, cultural environment, personal facilities etc).
To summarize the main issue of vocabulary learning, we should remember that it is influenced by many parameters such as, as we just said below, individual capacities, conceptual and grammatical knowledge, context (for instance, if a child is ill, it becomes necessary for him/her to map quickly and clearly new words about the illness to be understood and rightly healed), environment, age etc. Moreover, the child seems to be 'programmed' to attach labels to certain words rather than others, so a predisposition discovered by Markman in 1992. But still, we can make out generalities about lexical acquisition : as a whole the child uses a natural logic to get new words : first of all he 'matches a referent to the new word, then he compares it with the latter, he stores it in his memory to finally retrieve it on demand' (lecture of M. Garman). But the investigations we studied go farther : they tend to prove that robust abilities to learn more or less fast exist during childhood, even if there are (two main) constrains to that mapping.
One is the theory of Mutual Exclusivity : each object corresponds to one label of only one category (e.g. : for the same word 'dog' a child can name an animal, a puddle or his dog 'Fido').
The other main constrain is known as the Principle of Contrast after Clark; it states that 'children will not learn new words for word meaning they already have', or in other terms that they generally avoid synonyms. But with the example of the video sequences, the linguists realized that at the end, both a new and a known word the child had lerant could relate to the same, probably unconscious, idea (see : malicious and bad), so it would be more like similarities than contraries... Here is implicated the power and flexibility of vocabulary; later, the child will separate those words to get real synonyms.
But these theories will always be criticized because there will always be debates about child vocabulary learning among linguists, for child language development is an endless subject and children always keep on surprising us...
