A number of individual genes have been identified within species of plants that are responsible for particular characteristics. Some papers given in this report involve the identification of a single gene with respect to one characteristic. The need to study genes within many species and in conjunction with other acting genes has also been found to be relevant and is likely to prove useful in the understanding of the evolution of plant morphology and in turn the applications of this understanding. It is hoped that the applications of the understanding of the genetics of plant morphology will enable the improvement of crop yields and have massive economic advantages.
Genetic control of plant morphology has been investigated for many years with much interest being shown recently. This has been aided by advances in genetic techniques. The realisation of the potential economic benefits of furthering our knowledge in this area has been a significant driving force. The role of genetics in plant morphology has been considered to be important from very early on. In order to gain the best benefits from the applications of genetic control of plant morphology, it is important that the roles of individual genes and multigene affects are more understood in a wider range of species.
I suggest that the papers to be reviewed can be sorted into three sections; morphology, evolution and applications. This has been done because the articles appear to approach the subject of the genetic control of plant morphology from these three different angles.
In this section, three papers which investigate the specific effects of genes on morphology in chronological order are first reviewed, (Harevenal. 1996, Kimal. 1999 and Petschal. 2005). The more general report overviews of the genetic control of flowering time was then reviewed to conclude the section.
The first paper (Hareven et al 1996), involves genetic manipulation of the leaf architecture. It states that, in angiosperms, leaves can be simple or compound, and simple leaves, and the leaflets of compound leaves can also be sessile or with a petiole. It is suggested by this paper that morphological characteristics that are expressed on the leaves of plants are a result of gene expression. During this study it is stated that effects of the misexpression of the maize homeobox-containing knotted-1 (KN 1) gene are very different on simple leaved plants and compound leaved plants. Expression of the KN 1 gene does not change the shape of simple leaves but has a dramatic effect on compound leaves of tomatoes. These differences in reaction to KN 1 suggest there are inherent fundamental differences between the development of simple and compound leaves. This implies that simple and compound leaves are determined by two different developmental pathways. Therefore the genes that control development of these leaves are likely to have very different roles, therefore are conserved separately amongst species.
Another paper (Kimal. 1999) which also investigates the genetic influences of leaf shape studied a different gene, ROTUNDIFOLIA3 (ROT 3). It has been suggested that this gene, a member of the family of cytochromes P450, is involved in the processes that regulate length of leaves and floral organs. Experiments that were carried out in order to test this hypothesis suggested that transgenic plants that over-expressed the wild-type gene ROT 3 gene had longer leaves than the parent plant whilst experiencing no change to leave width. This suggests that the ROT 3 gene has a direct effect on the cell elongation of the leaves and not cell division. This is done by influencing brassinosteroids, flavinoids and lignin. It is also suggested that ROT 3 only affects the leaves or floral organs that are derived from leaves. Therefore ROT 3 is specific to leaf morphology.
The papers produced by Kim et al. and Hareven et al. give insight into genes that influence the shape, size and length of leaves on plants. They also give good insight into the crucial role of genetics in the morphological development of plant organs.
The third paper,( Petschal. 2005), investigates the role of the eukaryotic release factor 1 (eRF 1) in cell elongation and radical cell division. This paper suggests that eRF 1 has a profound effect on plant morphology. This results in the 'broomhead' phonotype due to plants exhibiting a reduction in internode elongation. The broomhead phenotype is caused by gene silencing via production of aberrant RNA, which acts as a template for degradation of itself and other homologous RNA. This results in clustering of malformed siliques at the top of the inflorescence stem. The Petschal. (2005) paper did establish that the result of cosuppression of eRF 1 in Arabidopsis has a direct impact of reduction in internode elongation causing the broomhead phenotype. More specific effects of down regulating eRF 1 have effects on specific cell types eg cambial cells and ectopically lignified cells. Because there are effects on the specific cell types as well as the already known broomhead phenotype, there is still much speculation as to whether eRF 1 functions in different processes and whether translocation termination is its only role. This paper fails to come to any concrete conclusions that had not been previously stated but suggests that screening for interaction proteins within Arabidopsis will provide further insight into the role of eRF 1.
In their paper, Koornneefal. (1998) reviewed genetic control of flowering time in Arabidopsis. They state the importance of timing of flowering for plants to reproduce sexually. The three different promoter pathways that are involved in this are 1) autonomous pathway which is affected by day length, 2) constitutive pathway which is affected by light quality and photoperiods, 3) vernalisation pathway, which is affected by cold weather. Morphological elements involved in some of the steps of initial stages of flowering. A little more is known with respect to more intermediate steps such as the coned flowering genes and in target genes of floral induction. The precise role of hormones and their association with the genes is little understood. This paper recognises that multigene control of flowering is induced by a wide array of factors and that the transitional phase of vegetative to sexual growth is likely to be a developmental default. It is stated that the study of different plants is required to gain good overall conclusions.
These four papers originate from very different countries over a period of about 10 years and are written by a number of authors. They identify the role of genetics in control of plant morphology, and single genes specifically involved with control of a specific morphological trait.
The second group under review centres on the evolution of genetic control. Although genetic analysis of morphological evolution still remains relatively unexplored progress has been made recently. Gene mapping of floral symmetry, sex determination, inflorescence architecture and compound leaves provide glimpses into evolution of morphological applications. However, these need to be studied as a unit in order for the ecology of the development of morphological traits to be understood fully (Shepardal. 2002).
From (Shepardal. 2002), it can be stated that homeotic genes are genetic regulators of structural development whereas MADS box genes control flower morphogenesis. Shepardal. (2002) state that establishing causal relationships between genetic molecules and morphological variants will require comparative studies of closely related species alongside molecular phylogenetic and population genetic analysis. Studies have suggested the role of certain genes in association with certain morphological characteristics in plants. For example, the transition from vegetative to reproductive stages are likely to be due to the TFL 1 and the LFY gene in Arabidopsis. Inflorescence indeterminacy seems to be controlled by the CEN/TFL 1 gene, and the compound leaf development seems to be controlled by KNOX/LFY/UFO genes.
Pandey (1979) states that, as an evolutionary strategy, plants have developed steps that encourage outbreeding. This means that the pollen of one individual is unable to fertilise flowers of the same individual and therefore helps the species maintain genetic variability. Pandey (1979) suggests that the S-gene has been found to control this self-incompatibility and synthesis of the S protein by controlling transcription and translocation of the S-gene. This paper (Pandey et al 1979) suggests there may be some evidence that there are both intraspecific and interspecific incompatibility as functions of the same S-gene complex. This indicates that allelic specificity controls polymorphism at two levels. This (Pandey 1979) suggests interspecific incompatibility is primitive and developed in the progenitors of anemopilous gymnosperms. Intraspecific incompatibility is thought to have followed in angiosperms, and the role of this secondary specificity is thought to promote cross-fertilisationand therefore maximize genetic variability.
In their paper, Perrieal. (2005) investigated two species of fern in New Zealand. These were distinct due to one character: leaf morphology. The Asplenium hookerianum Colenso with broader pinnules and Aspenium colensoi Colenso with more narrow pinnules. Both AFLP DNA - fingerprinting and sequencing of chloroplast DNA (trnL trn F region) was used to determine if these species were genetically distinct and therefore separate species or not. With the use of an analysis of molecular variance (AMOVA), this study found there to be no absolute discontinuity, and therefore no genetic difference between the two  'species'. This paper is unclear in the conclusions drawn. It is unlikely that environmental factors can be the cause of differences between ferns due to their close geographical location.
The first two papers reviewed in this section (Shepardal. 2002 and Pandeyal. 1979) were clear, concise and gave good explanation with use of appropriate figures. The Perrieal. (2005) paper, I found unclear. The three papers recognise the possible different effects of one gene on different species and that multigene effects can act to affect a single charictoristic.
Aribidopsis is widely used as a model species because it has a small, uncomplicated genome, a short life cycle, easy to grow in laboratory conditions and its genome was the first to be sequenced.
Irishal. 2004 states, for reasons mentioned above, Aribidopsis has been used for research involving evolutionary development. This states that evolutionary development Irishal. (2004) has been used to give rise to different morphologies by means of selection acting upon mutations to fix them within a phenotype. In order to find out whether these changes are species specific, it is necessary to compare known developmental genes with their orthologs in other species, assess character changes by mapping into species phylogony and identify adaptive traits of natural variation with closely related specie, then compare their genomes. Problems can occur with this because the abundance of duplicate genes can make it difficult to make accurate comparisons. Furthermore, the comparison of non-model species is difficult. Despite these problems, a number of genes that have been identified as key regulatory genes have been found to have a consistent role across species. KNOX genes have been associated with leaf development, MADS box genes with petal development and CONSTANS with activation of flowering. This has been done by identifying gene loci in certain species using quantitative trait locus analysis and multiple backcrosses.
Much more work needs to be done on a wider range of species, but this work is likely to prove useful in future work involving crops and improving their yield sizes, but this paper provides useful insight.
Dellaportaal. (1994) states the uses of research mentioned above in an agricultural context. The maize flower is separated into the pistillate ear (male) and staminate tassel (female). For production of female flowers, dwarf mutations (d1, d2, d3, d5) and anther earl (An 1 and D8) occur. These have the effect of stamen abortion by blocking normal specific steps in gibberelin biosynthesis pathways. The production of male flowers mutants (ts 1 and ts 2) causes failure of normal pistil abortion process and induction of ectopic stamen abortion. This work enables sectors of male spikelets to be generated in a completely feminised floret, using an unstable transposon-induced ts2 mutation. This paper (Dellaportaal. 1994) suggests that plants, like animals, are initially bisexual with the potential to develop towards either sex. This is an important step in understanding genetics and the possible manipulation of this is likely to prove useful however controversial, for agricultural processes. Unisexuality in maize can be selectively bred by humans and facilitates large-scale production of hybrid off-spring, which now represents the vast majority of the maize world wide and is responsible for a massive increase in the grain yield.
These two papers, both produced in the USA date from ten years ago to recent times. This possibly reflects needs of the USA to improve crops genetically and economic benefits of doing so. This may be because the USA is a large country, with much land that is currently not suitable for agricultural use. It is also affluent and recognises potential benefits of applications of genetic control of plant morphology. Therefore money has, no doubt, been directed in the way of research in this area.
Reviewed papers cover a wide variety of countries over about thirty years. Most of these papers, were produced in the last ten years. This indicates current high levels of interest in this field. Companies as well as Universities have shown interest (eg Petschal. 2005 and Pandy 1979), and suggests the level of economic interest.
There are no specific theories that exist within this line of research, but papers that have been reviewed all build upon knowledge to give a more accurate picture of genetic control of plant morphology.
The papers reviewed within the morphology section are useful because researchers have gained knowledge and suggested individual genes that control a specific morphological traits of species. These papers however (Irishal. 2004 and Dellaporta et al 1994), recognise that specific genes may have different morphological effects on different plant species, and genes may also act alongside other genes to give a single morphological trait. Until now Arabidopsis has been used as a test species. Therefore it is important to study effects of genes in a variety of plant species.
It is significant that many countries have carried out research in this area. Although it appears from this report that the USA have taken the first steps with respect to the applications of genetic control, it is likely that other, less developed countries will require this kind of research in order to feed ever expanding populations.
