Looking at economics and welfare internationally, it appears to be deeply heterogeneous. The majority of people in the world live in conditions of underdevelopment (even if this word should be used carefully) with withdrawn economies, often strongly dependent on richer countries. This situation is taking place in a world which is becoming increasingly globalised, leaving developing countries to deal with undesired effects of economic policies, which are decided in the northern hemisphere.
An important issue for developing countries, whose economies are often still bounded to agricultural production, concerns agricultural policies. In this essay I'm going to analyse the economical aspects of agricultural export subsidies and their effects on the international system with a focus on developing countries. I will explain what an export subsidy is, how it works effectively and its consequences on a country 's economy. I will give some examples, concluding with suggestions of possible solutions and perspectives for developing countries according to Devinder Sharma 's thesis. These issues are important to understand the relation between the north and south of the world.
Devinder Sharma is a food and trade policy analyst, he is an award-winning journalist, writer, thinker and researcher. He also chairs the New Delhi-based forum for biotechnology and food security. His writing are focused on biotechnology, intellectual property rights and food trade as causes of poverty.
Agricultural policies, especially subsidies on export, decided in richer countries, have strong effects on developing countries. In fact they have to face the competition of developed countries' products also in their internal markets. As a consequence, developing countries can create tariffs on imports and other kinds of commercial barriers. This action is obviously against the ideal of free trade as the best way for economical development, that is often claimed by developed nations.
Hence a conflict arises between developing and developed countries' spokesmen. The World Bank Chief Economist Nicholas Stern claimed in 2003 "Developing countries must remove their trade barriers regardless of what is happening in the developed countries.", but Ajit Singh, India 's Agriculture minister said: "There 's no way we can reduce tariffs on agricultural products unless the rich nations cut their domestic support and subsidies as well as export subsidies.".
Sharma, D. Zero tolerance for farm subsidies. Available from: February 2003 [3 November 2005].
In order to be able to give an opinion on this debate it is necessary to give a complete definition of subsidy and, in particular, of agricultural export subsidy. When we speak about subsidies, in this context, we are speaking about export subsidies, that is to say, payments given by a country 's government to domestic producers or firms, who sell goods abroad. If we consider agricultural subsidy, the payments would be given for agricultural products to export.
Krugman, P.R. and Obstfeld, M., ed. International economics. Theory and Policy, 6th edition USA, Addison-Weasley, 2003, chapter 8.
The subsidy could be specific (a fixed amount of money for every unit of good) or ad valorem (an amount proportional to the worth of the exported good). 3.
The main effect of a subsidy is that it produces a shift in both relative supply (RS) and relative demand (RD) curves (the graphic representation of a country 's or world supply or demand for a good a relative to that for good b as a function of the price of a relative to the price of b). It means that the prices will change, making domestic and international prices diverge. In particular, an export subsidy will raise domestic prices above international level for commodities of which the country is a net exporter at the protected domestic price. When the government gives an export subsidy the producers export goods abroad until the internal price exceeds the international price of an amount equal to the subsidy.
Grant, R.M. and Shaw, E.K., ed.Current issue in Economic Policy, 1980,pp.96-103.
Krugman, P.R. and Obstfeld, M., ed. International economics. Theory and Policy, 6th edition USA, Addison-Weasley, 2003, chapter 8 and 5.
The export subsidy is a government intervention, therefore it has, as all trade policies, the purpose to modify something in a country 's terms of trade, in order to pursue some specific political objectives. One of the main purposes that can be found for export subsidies is to encourage national producers. As an example, in developed countries, an export subsidy is given in order to protect their producers in the international market from the competition of other countries, poorer countries, where the cost of factors of production, such as labour or land, is much cheaper and as a consequence, also the final price of the good will be lower. Other important purposes could be to support income to the nation, stabilise prices and equalise balance of payments (the record of a country 's transactions with the rest of the world).
In order to understand how a subsidy works effectively, we have to analyse its effects on RD and RS curves. Before this it is important to say that subsidies, like tariffs, make a difference between external prices (price in the international market) and internal prices (price within the country). This means that we have to be careful to define terms of trade (that measure the ratio according to which countries exchange goods). We have to consider that terms of trade correspond to external prices so we will analyse how a subsidy affects RS and RD as a function of external prices.
Suppose that country x offers a 10% subsidy on the value of any good a exported. The effects of this subsidy on the internal price of a will be a 10% higher price relative to the price of good b. As a consequence country 's producers will increase the production of good a and decrease the production of good b, while consumers will change their preferences in the opposite way. This means, as is shown on the graph, that the RS curve will move from RS1 to RS2, increasing the world 's relative supply of good a, while the world 's relative demand of the same good will decrease, shifting the RD curve from RD1 to RD2. This will affect the equilibrium from 1 to 2, changing the prices: the relative price of a falls from Pa/Pb(1) to Pa/Pb(2).
Krugman, P.R. and Obstfeld, M., ed. International economics. Theory and Policy, 6th edition USA, Addison-Weasley, 2003, chapter 5 and 8.
The effect of paying an export subsidy is that country x exporters will continue to export their goods until the domestic price is equal to the world price plus unit subsidy. This means that domestic prices are forced upwards, then the output will increase, domestic demand will decrease and the volume of export will be expanded. Therefore domestic consumers suffer higher prices and taxpayers have to bear a subsidy cost, while foreign producers are made to face additional subsidies competition in international markets. 7 Considering the international market, we could try to give a generalised conclusion on the effect of subsidies. If the government of the USA, as an hypothetic example, offers an export subsidy on goods that are exported by India, India 's terms of trade would be worsened. If the USA offers a subsidy on a good which India is an importer, India 's terms of trade would be improved.
Grant, R.M. and Shaw, E.K., ed.Current issue in Economic Policy, 1980,pp.96-103.
This is what happens in the international system. Now we can understand the debate about agricultural subsidies that has arisen between developed and developing countries more easily. To do this I will give some examples.
The current level of Canadian dairy exports is $415million but it is expected to fall, following a decision of the WTO (World Trade Organization) Appellate Body, that has discovered Canada 's government is subsidising production of milk exports in a strongly trade-distorting way. This verdict goes against an earlier decision, that is to say that quite a lot of subsidies still remain hidden. Meanwhile India, the world 's biggest producers of milk, cannot export because it is unable to produce milk for the current low international milk price, due to its inability to subsidise its dairy industry.
Sharma, D. Zero tolerance for farm subsidies. Available from: February 2003 [3 November 2005].
Another example is American wheat in India. The cross-subsidisation makes the American wheat available at Chennai, in the south of India, where wheat cannot be grown, at a port price much lower than that of the Indian golden grain. The south of India finds it more economical to import wheat from America than to transport it from northern parts of the country. As a consequence, while wheat rots in the open in the north of the country, traders and food industry rely on imports, wheat growers suffer and many of them have gone bankrupt. 7.
These examples show how export subsidies affect the economic system between developed and developing countries and demonstrate why they are a danger for poorer countries, creating unfair and unbalanced economic relations. To protect themselves from effects of subsidies on competition (both in the international and domestic market) developing countries often impose tariffs on import. Obviously this action disturbs developed countries that could gain more without tariffs. All these issues build the international debate, just mentioned.
One important example of an export subsidy policy is within the CAP (The Common Agriculture Policy of the European Union). In the beginning one of the explicit purposes of the CAP was the income support, to achieve a 'fair' level of income for the farming community. Therefore the 'old CAP' included policies to support prices with import taxes and export subsidies (even if the GATT-General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the predecessor to the WTO- gives limits on subsidised exports and on expenditure on export subsidies). Over the years, the CAP has been reformed several times, mainly concentrating on changing methods of subsidies to farmers. Nevertheless, even if the forms of payments and priorities have been modified, elements of the 'old CAP' still remain, such as export subsidies on agricultural products and on processed (Non-Annex I) goods.
Swinbank, A., Lecture Week 4, Complete comparison of VIL and DP schemes, An Overview of the CAP.
Developed countries give a lot of different reasons to justify their use of subsidies. For example Japan, whose subsidies are bigger than the whole contribution to the nation 's income by agriculture, claims that it has adopted this policy to protect industries if there was something wrong with import.
The European Union, that has a subsidising policy included in its CAP (often by way of direct payments) defends its support with the theory of 'multi-functionality' of agriculture (agriculture is not merely a means of producing food, but also a way of life). This theory, according to D. Sharma, would be "a camouflage for agricultural subsidies under the garb of protecting rural landscape and lifestyle, as well as the welfare of livestock, even if they are not efficient" 10.
However there are some attempts and proposals to reduce subsidies in different developed countries, driven by the obligation of the WTO to reduce supports.
The US prefer the 'Swiss formula' that suggests to decrease domestic support that is trade - distorting, down to 5% of the value of a country 's total agricultural production. This would shift the limit on US subsidies from $19billion to $10billion.
Sharma, D. Zero tolerance for farm subsidies. Available from: February 2003 [3 November 2005].
In May 2004 the EU decided to eliminate all export subsidies, by a date to be agreed, because there is a correspondence with export credits, food aid, state trading enterprising, etc.. The UK prime minister, Tony Blair, has proposed 2010. Nevertheless such a reform would leave export refunds of 645 euros/tonne (butter), 47 euros/tonne (smp) and 152 euros/tonne (sugar). Reforms 'on the table' do n't eliminate the need for export subsidies.
Swinbank, A., Lecture Week 6, An update on CAP reform: An overview of the Fischler Package and the prospects for Hong Kong Sharma, D. Zero tolerance for farm subsidies . Available from: February 2003 [3 November 2005].
D.Sharma has strong views about these proposals because he said that they are "all on paper only, knowing that the shifting of subsidies to more suitable 'boxes' (in other forms, less limited and less visible as subsidies) is already going on" and that, referring on EU plan, "the direct payment that the EU proposes as the upper limit, is more than the annual earning of more than 1000 farming families in India 's hinterland.".
D.Sharma, apart from his criticism, analyses the situation, proposing alternatives for developing countries. He suggests two main aspects to protect agriculture, which is the mainstay of developing economies.
On the first hand, he speaks about 'zero-tolerance' on agricultural subsidies, that is to say that any agreement will not be made until the subsidies in the western countries are removed.
On the other hand he proposes an 'agriculture shield' for developing countries in order to protect them from the unbalanced competition of richer countries. This idea comes from Mexico 's announcement of an 'agriculture shield' program to ensure protection to its farmers against US competition. This program includes compensatory tariffs and this is an action allowed by WTO, because it is a protective action against threatening foreign competition, dangerous for the viability of agricultural sector.
Maybe the position of D.Sharma is a little bit strong, but in my opinion these two ideas could effectively be a weapon to help developing countries obtain a better deal.
