Nowadays, overweight and obesity are increasingly prevalent in the United Kingdom. Many people argue that it should be all blamed to the food industry, although obesity involves lots of factors, which are often difficult to disentangle. Furthermore, the majority of the people suffering obesity within that increased rate are children, and the food industry should take most of the responsibilities, especially the 'Junk food'. At the mean time, parents should serve as role models to their children to instill and reinforce healthy lifestyles based on variety, balance, moderation and nutritional food. In a word, food industry should be blamed but is only one of the factor which encourages the prosperous of obesity.
Obesity is the state of excess accumulation of fat in and on the body, which is often measured by the body mass index (BMI). BMI express the ratio of weight to height. The amount of the body fat includes concern for both the distribution of fat throughout the body and the size of the adipose tissue deposits adults are either overweight or obese. Individuals with a BMI of 25 to 29.9 are considered as overweight, while individuals with a BMI of 30 or more are considered as obese.
Some food scientists said the food industry acts as one of the people 's obese chief criminal in some kind of degree, while obesity caused a lot of health problems.
Recently, the English government published one public healthy white paper plan stipulation, in order to prevent the spreading of the child obese phenomenon in England. The government was preparing to promote a new policy which should forbid the 'Junk food' advertisement being broadcasted on the TV 's frequency channel. It attracted the attention of the food business, such as McDonald 's, which improve a lot of their food.
However, not only the food industry should be blamed for the increased obesity in UK, but also a lack of physical activity, altered eating habit, and increased sedentary behaviors are accountable for this.
In the first place, obesity is related to a number of health problems, including Type 2 Diabetes, heart disease, stroke and cancer. According to Julie Gerberding, director of the Centers for Disease Control, 'Obesity is quickly catching up to tobacco as the leading actual cause of the death'. Nowadays, childhood overweight and obesity rate are especially alarming. Research shows that overweight children are more likely to become overweight adults, and therefore, are at greater risk for associated health problems. In fact, 60% of overweight five to ten years-old children already have at least one risk factor for heart disease.
To note that, obesity problem is not only in UK. The World Health Organization (WHO) reported in 1995 that there were an estimated 200million obese adults. By 2000, the number of obese adults was estimated to be 300 million, with as many as 1.7 billion people overweight. The WHO considers obesity to be one of the top ten causes of preventable death of people world wide. It is obvious that physiological consequents of obesity can range from un-fatal effects that only impact quality of life to terms that put an individual at risk for premature death.
As we mentioned above, Type 2 Diabetes, hypertension, elevated cholesterol, cardiovascular disease, and gall bladder disease are those terms which are also data implicating obesity as a factor in the certain cancers development. Most health professionals believe that the more overweight an individual is, the higher risk he or she is to experience these health problems.
In addition to the association of obesity with serious disease, there are many other ways that obesity causes disability and reduces the quality of life.
Damage to weight-bearing joints caused by severe obesity. 'osteoarthritis of knees or hips is a common complaint in middle-aged obese persons and weight reduction often brings much relief.' (taken from page 25 of Research on obesity, a report of the DHSS/MRC Group) 'obesity reduces physical fitness, respiratory function and work capacity'.
Obesity in women is regarded as a social disability and therefore causes much unhappiness.
To sum up, obesity appears to be not only a cause of disease, but sometimes a result of unhappiness, anxiety and tension.
In the second place, apart from the effects of obesity, the factors of obese become more and more deeply concerned. (One of those factors which need further studies is the heredity and internal secretion.).
The most important factor is the situation of the society, if the economy is wealthy and the food industry is developed, it is easy for people to obtain food. In fact, weight gain results when calories consumed are greater than calories expended, and societal changes have led to an imbalance in calorie intakes and expenditures.
What 's more, the eating habit of adolescents changed a lot while the high contain of sugar or high oil turns more popular and it will lead to future health care problems.
In other word, the rise in obesity can be attributed to an imbalance between calories consumed and calories expended; an imbalance that had resulted from gradual changes in a complex set of social factors. Individuals have become less active in all areas of their lives, work and free time have become much more sedentary. On the side of eating habits also changed, such as diet composition, increased eating away from home, and portion sizes.
Furthermore, lack of physical activity contributes to obesity. Teenagers and adults need to participate in at least 30 minutes of physical activity each day. However, physical activity does not have to be strenuous to maintain weight and promote health, which means 'in spite of the very great difficulties of measuring energy balance, it must still remain true that even a small decrease in energy expenditure on physical activity, unless counter balanced by an adaptive response.' (taken from page 15 of Research on obesity, a report of the DHSS/MRC Group) (It obviously shows that food industry is not the only factor of the claimed obesity phenomenon in UK.).
Last but not least, nutritional problems in food and the food industry deserves much of the blame. At the time of the industrial revolution, one of the greatest of all nutritional fallacies is that food for the masses, which cannot be produced without the technology of the modern food industry, is necessarily bad food of poor nutritional quality. As they have appeared on the market, all industrially produced foods in their turn have met with suspicion; canned foods; canned milk, plastic-wrapped frozen or chilled ready-for-cooking meat, poultry and vegetables, and all new foods have been considered as in some way unhealthy or lacking sound nutritional properties. It is true that there have been mistakes in food procession. (taken from page 29 of Eating for health, a discussion booklet prepared by the Health Departments of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).
What 's more, most nutritional problems in adolescents and children are related to the consumption of too much 'Junk food'. Junk food is food with mineral nutritional value, which is characterized by high levels of fat, particularly saturated fats and refined sugar. The portion sizes of junk food have increased dramatically over the last 20 years. For example, when most fast food franchises originated, a 'regular' serving of French fried potatoes contained 201 calories; today, a  'super-sized' serving of fries contains about 610 calories.
As the White Paper being published, food companies have already taken action to avoid criticism that they are encouraging obesity.
For instance, McDonald 's is among the organizations to have reduced advertisement of fatty food to young children. They reacted to growing alarm about incidence of obesity in children by expanding its menu to incorporate salads, fruit, low fat milk and bottled water. They also reduce the salt in regular fries and encourage children to have fruit bag and fruit drink options in Happy Meal.
Unilever owned Breyers ice cream has introduced its first light ice cream products for use as part of a low-carbohydrate diet. The company claims that the new products have half the fat and 40% percent fewer calories than regular ice cream.
What 's more, Sainsbury 's has announced it will introduce its own colored logos to signify healthier options from January, whereas Pizza Hut introduced a low fat version of its original pizza.
It all shows that, food retailers is now trying to improve, and food industry turns to satisfied on a low-fat, low-carbohydrate but more nutritional production.
Furthermore, obese is not a patent in industry countries, those at the lowest income levels have increased the most. Overweight has replaced malnutrition as the most prevalent nutritional problem for the poor. At this point, it is also not the fault of food industry.
All in all, obesity is considered to be a disorder in industrial countries.
The food industry can be blamed for the increasing in obesity in UK, but its dramatically growing is probably also caused by changes in eating habits, decreased physical activity and the economic and social factors. In that case, the government and the whole society should be more concerned about it. In fact, the important thing is, it is the choice of everybody to decide whether to eat Junk food or not.
In addition, the conditions associated with obesity is: Heart Disease, Diabetes, Cancer, Osteoarthritis, Gallstones, Lipid disorders, High blood pressure, Respiratory problems, Depression and Social discrimination.
Luckily, there are some resources or foresight to design urban and suburban environments that encourage active lifestyles, such as sidewalks and walking paths. Areas that also require more study are the impact of genetics and psychological factors on the development of overweight and obesity.
