Trypsin inhibitors (TI) are proteins commonly found in beans and legumes such as soyabeans, kidney beans and egg white, which inhibit trypsin activity. Trypsin is a major protease or proteolytic enzyme - endopeptidase in the duodenum of the human alimentary canal. It catalyses protein digestion and results in peptides.
Does not function when TI presents no p-nitroaniline released.
In this practical, TI is extracted from defatted soyabean meal and incubated under standard conditions (standard - without TI, heated and unheated TI) therefore used to determine Trypsin Inhibitor Activity (TIA).
TIA (mg/g sample) for unheated and heated samples.
All are positive results; all solutions in test tubes appear yellow.
Standard sample absorbencies are always greater than blank sample absorbencies. This is due to the presence or absence of trypsin: thus a release of p-nitroaniline by BAPNA digestion. Solutions appear yellow.
As expected, USa has only 41% absorbance of Std, because TI presents. In other words, less than half of the amount of p-nitroaniline is released from successful BAPNA digestion.
HSa has the lowest absorbance among the Standard samples, although it expected to be similar to Std because of the denatured IT.
All blank samples (standard, heated and unheated) are expected to have very similar absorbencies, because of the absence of trypsin, therefore no successful inhibition even TI presents. Thus no release of yellow p-nitroaniline and results in the lowest sets of absorbencies: StdB, 0.022; USaB, 0.021; except for HSaB, 0.095 (anomalous).
For heated samples, TI is denatured so there is no trypsin inhibition. HSaB (absorbance value = 0.095), which is four times higher the other two blank samples. This is likely due to experimental error.
Should really write about the sources of errors of the high absorbencies, high inhibition % and high TIA of the heated samples.
E.g. the incomplete heating of soya meal, thus TI is not completely deactivated - using a test tube. Results show even mild heat (for a short time only. Problem - does n't know whether it is heated completely, just by the appearance, bubbling.) to IT can still lower the TIA and inhibition %. Improvement (as simple as using a thermometer) needs to be suggested to ensure IT is completely deactivated.
From Clara 's: partially denatured TI - just heat to boil - for a short time, has a great effect on decreasing inhibition. This can therefore improve the nutritional value of soya bean, by improving the protein quality and being more easily digested and absorbed by the body.
At 100 oC only 15 min of steaming is required to achieve max. protein efficiency and to inactivate the TI (Rackis 1966). This again proves insufficient heating of soyabean meal in the practical. (100oC for 15min) "when moisture of whole soyabeans was raised to 60% or higher by soaking overnight, boiling for only 5 min. is sufficient to denature TI." (Albrecht et al., 1966).
Ca n't be eaten raw then.
Defatted soyabean meal used - Free fatty acids present in soya bean can act as non-specific trypsin inhibitors. So it is essential to remove fat contaminants (in this practical). To obtain a fair test. Otherwise, inhibition caused by those free fatty acids will be measured together with the TI - higher.
Not accurate results for heated samples - Inhibition %   40% (literature value?) - Much greater. Thus assay should have been repeated in order to obtain more accurate and reliable results. Not possible under limited time.
BAPNA: An accurate electronic scale calibrated to four decimal places is used in weighing 0.0815g BAPNA. The weighing boat is rinsed with dimethyl sulphoxide and the washing is transferred in order to obtain all 0.0815g BAPNA for the assay, which is experimentally difficult.
Although this shows the trypsin solution is not exactly made, the high value means a lot of trypsin activity with no TI.
Temperature of water bath is shown electronically as 37.2 oC. Accurate photospectrometer calibrated to three decimal places. Whirlymix (vortexer) ensure the solutions are well mixed, in order to obtain a fair test. Accurate Gibson pipette and glass pipette are used.
Possible incomplete heating of soyabean meal.
Triplicates, increase reliability so that any anomalies can be marked by comparison. Vortexing ensure the solution is evenly mixed. Ideal timing - 30-second gap in transfer - fair test.
TIA shows the amount (mg) of pure trypsin inhibited per gram of sample. The higher the absorbance (higher the yellow intensity), the more the BAPNA is broken down, normal protein digestion takes place, because of the less TI presents, thus lower inhibition percentage and TIA, vice versa.
The anomalous inhibition percentage of heated samples is due to high anomalous HSaB absorbance value = 0.095). However, TIAs are more reliable in this case to show that heated samples have a lower TIA value than unheated ones. Despite it is expected to be much lower than 49.3mg/g sample because of the denatured and inactivated TI, thus no inhibition, unless, there is another protein inhibitor: "there are two types of these (protein) inhibitors (Kunitz trypsin inhibitor and bowman-birk inhibitor)" in soyabeans.
