The role that antioxidants play in the diet, and their associated health benefits has been understood for quite some time. The mechanisms too, by which antioxidants prevent free radicals from causing oxidative stress has now been well documented (see sections 5.1 and 5.2). There is increasing research looking into various food products and beverages, and the extent to which the antioxidants they contain, may be utilised in the body.
Also, in-line with this, there has been increased research into the assay techniques used to assess the antioxidant potential of various substances. The three most commonly used assays are; and these are going to be used throughout this investigation.
The aim of this investigation is to give a critical evaluation of the three assay techniques mentioned above and, to compare the values obtained for the antioxidant potential of various samples.
The three assays will then be subsequently used to assess the antioxidant potential of extracts from a range of coffee and tea samples. The three assay techniques will be compared for how they rank the various samples and the values they deliver.
The importance of antioxidants within the diet and their contribution to a healthy body has long been understood. For nearly six decades, it has been understood that reactive oxygen species (ROS) are a major cause of disease (Parke, 1999) and that antioxidants are able to reduce the damage caused by ROS. It is a paradox that oxygen, which is considered as essential for life, is also reported to be toxic (Kaur and Kapoor, 2001). As well as the important role that antioxidants play within nutrition, it has also been suggested that they have a role to play as preservatives (Kaur and Kapoor, 2001). In more recent years attention has also turned to other similar plant derived compounds such as polyphenolic compounds which also have antioxidant related properties (Morton et al, 2000).
Within the body, antioxidants work to prevent the damage caused by free radicals. With importance to living organisms, these free radicals include; hydrogen peroxide (H 2O 2), hydroxyl (OH  ), superoxide (O 2  -) and nitric oxide (NO  ) to name but a few (Aruoma, 1999). In the past decade there have been numerous studies which have looked into the effect of various antioxidants and in particular, the effect they have on individuals with coronary heart disease. In general, it can be stated that in patients who have suffered from some form of heart disease, there is a marked increase in recovery rates in those who take supplements of antioxidants and other polyphenol derived compounds (Asplund, 2002).
There has also been much research into the antioxidants contained within food. This includes for the first time, a development of a database of the antioxidant capacities of both the lipophilic and hydrophilic components of foods (Wu et al. 2004). There has also been much research into the antioxidant content of other foods like fruit and vegetables and even into the antioxidant content of red wine. The antioxidant content of red wine for example, as measured by various assays including ORAC was found to be extremely high (Sanchez-Moreno et al, 2003). As too have more detailed investigation revealed the antioxidant potential of other fruits and berries including cranberries and their seeds which are normally just regarded as waste products (Bushman et al, 2004).
The following sequence of reactions gives a general overview of free radical oxidation. This free radical chain mechanism may be split into three parts, initiation, propagation and termination, as highlighted below;.
Antioxidants are able to disrupt the chain mechanism shown above and are therefore able to reduce the amount of oxidative stress that may be caused within the body. In food systems, the most effective antioxidants function by interrupting the free radical chain mechanism, and this can be done as indicated below (Dugan, 1976).
The antioxidant content of tea, particularly green has become something of a trendy health phenomenon over the past decade. Many green teas are marketed for their health benefits, and the antioxidants and other Phenolic compounds that they contain. On a dry weight basis, the antioxidant potential of some teas were found to be higher than that of the potential for other fruits and vegetables (Prior and Cao, 1999).
Other research has gone to show that green tea can have some positive affect in reducing the effects caused by ultra-violet light on the skin (i.e. reducing the affect of skin cancer). It was found that drinking high volumes of green tea, would offer some protection against UV damage (Morley et al, 2005). The claims associated with tea drinking are very important, particularly within the United Kingdom where large volumes are consumed. It should, however, be noted that many of the health benefits have shown to be stronger in green tea and in the UK, it is largely black tea that is drunk. A survey conducted in 2002 suggests that 77% of the adult population within Britain drink tea each day, with an average of three cups being consumed each day (Henderson and Gregory 2002). There have also been many other health claims about tea including the reduction of coronary heart disease, and helping to prevent memory loss (Williamson, 2005). Consumers of black tea (usually drunk with milk) will also benefit from it 's ability to help bind the calcium found within the added milk (Charrier, 2002).
The health benefits associated with coffee have n't been so positive and much of the research within coffee has looked at caffeine contents rather than any other benefits that may be associated with its consumption. The negative association with the consumption of drinking coffee is n't new either, in fact there are reports dating back as far as 1674 that drinking too much coffee could make men impotent (Schenker, 2001). It 's not just the caffeine content of coffee that has been cause for concern, coffee lipids have also been shown to increase cholesterol (Heckers et al, 1994) and more recently, there has been concern about the acrylamide content of roasted coffee.
Having said this however, antioxidants are known to be contained within coffee - particularly of Columbian origin (Lopez-Galilea, 2004). And there has been some extensive research into the effects that roasting has on the antioxidant capacity of various coffee brews. This discovered that as the degree of roasting increased, the relative antioxidant level decreased (Castillo et al, 2002). Studies have also shown that the Arabica coffee species also has a greater peroxyl scavenging ability (Castillo et al, 2005). The latest research from America has also gone to show that just by the sheer volume of coffee drunk, coffee is the leading source of antioxidants within the USA (Open Press, 2005).
Coffee is generally categorised in to two groups; those derived from Arabica beans and those derived from Robusta beans. Robusta and Arabica coffee beans are of the same species but different varieties and therefore contain many similar components and compounds. Subtle differences may, however, be observed for example, Robusta coffee is known to contain substantially more chlorogenic acids than Arabica coffee (Illy and Viani, 1995) - hence the more bitter and rubbery taste associated with Robusta coffee.
Coffee is known to contain a range of antioxidants and other polyphenolic compounds (Casillo, 2002). As previously mentioned it also contains a range of coffee lipids and of course caffeine (Schenker, 2001).
Raw coffee contains proteins, oils, sugars, dextrin 's, pentosans, cellulose, chlorogenic acids (as mentioned above) and various other acids and minor constituents. Upon roasting, most of the water contained within the raw coffee bean will be driven off and the sugars will be caramelised (Winton and Winton, 1939) - it is the roasting that develops the characteristic flavours associated with coffee.
There are many health benefits and claims which have long been associated with drinking tea, particularly green, which has seen much publicity in recent years. The report by Prior went to show the level to which antioxidants and other polyphenolic compounds are found within tea (Prior and Cao, 1999). Tea, actually by weight basis, contains more caffeine than coffee and also contains many enzymes (which are largely denatured during the processing of the tea leaf), polyphenols and theaflavins and thearubigins (Harler, 1963).
Another large constituent of many teas is the tannins they contain. As with coffee, tea leafs in their un-fired form also contain a proportion of oils, some of which, will remain during the firing process. The levels of tannin too will slightly be reduced during the firing process (Winton and Winton, 1939).
Along with the increase in research into the role that antioxidants play in the diet, there has also been a lot of research into various techniques for assessing the oxidation power of various antioxidants. The Ferric Reducing Ability of Plasma (FRAP) is a well established method for assessing antioxidant power. It is inexpensive, gives repeatable results, is straightforward and speedy and utilises reagents which are simple to prepare (Benzie and Strain, 1996). Benzie and Strain go on to say that the procedure works well both with single isolated antioxidants and with mixtures. They also report of a recovery of between 91 to 112% on FRAP assays of known 'antioxidant powers' which again, indicates a reliable process.
Another well researched assay for determining the antioxidant potential of a sample is the Oxygen Radical Absorbance Assay (ORAC) technique. There are many variations on this technique using various different compounds but the one using fluorescein as the fluorescent probe has been established as being an improved method. It has been demonstrated that by using flurosecein in place of B-phycoerythrin superior results were obtained and that the ORAC FL method is able to provide a direct measure of hydrophilic chain-breaking antioxidant capacity against peroxyl radicals (Ou et al, 2001).
Other research, comparing the FRAP and ORAC methodologies across has shown that different trends may be detected between the two methods. Research has concluded that the differences between the results obtained are likely to be as a result of the basic chemistry upon which the two principles work. A research paper published in 2002 suggested that the ORAC method was chemically more relevant to chain breaking whilst the FRAP methodology had limitations including interference (Ou et al, 2002).
The Trolox Equivalence Antioxidant Assay (TEAC) has been far less extensively researched. It is however another relative simple assay to perform and as such has been used extensively by labs reporting various antioxidant assays. Much of the work into the TEAC methodology has been conducted by Catherine Rice - Evans in London and has particularly looked at the method for assessing the antioxidant potential of various body fluids - including plasma (Rice-Evans, 1994). Because the TEAC assay is an end point assay, the reaction rate differences between oxidants and antioxidants is not detected which means there are limitations to this methodology (Huang et al, 2005).
Any antioxidant assay, is only able to act as a measure of the antioxidant activity of the chemicals measured in that particular assay (Huang et al, 2005). In principle, the various different assays that may be used to measure some form of antioxidant potential all work on the same basic idea. In all assays, the accurate measurement of antioxidant capacity requires both the inhibition time and inhibition degree to be taken into account (Huang et al, 2002). All the assays, like the FRAP assay, work by comparing absorbance changes of a test sample against that of a known standard (Benzie and Strain, 1996). The absorbance changes (or loss of fluorescence) are an indication of the extent of damage caused by the reactive oxygen species and therefore can be used as an indication as to the effectiveness of the antioxidant power of the sample (Ou et al, 2001).
First, the three antioxidant assay (FRAP, TEAC, ORAC) procedures will be used to set up three respective calibration curves. Once this has been done, and the three procedures have been understood and verified for repeatability, they will be used to assess the antioxidant potential of a range of samples;.
Each sample will be assessed for antioxidant potential with each of the procedures and the results will be done in triplicate (or five times depending upon time availability).
The samples will be prepared and then frozen so that the same sample can be tested across each of the three Assays - this will be done to try and eliminate any variation that may occur in sample preparation.
For each of the repeats a fresh sample will be prepared and again split into three so that it can be tested across each of the assays. With each of the repeats, the assays will be conducted in a difference sequence so that the same assay is n't used for the fresh (as appose to the frozen) sample on each occasion.
