S. aureus is an important pathogen due to a combination of toxin-mediated virulence, invasiveness and antibiotic resistance. Staphylococcus aureus bacteria are gram-positive, spherical (cocci-shaped) and often simply called "staph" bacteria. Staph bacteria can live harmlessly on many skin surfaces, especially around the nose, mouth, genitals, and rectum. But when the skin is punctured or broken for any reason, staph bacteria can enter the wound and cause an infection. The close association of S. aureus with humans leads to the inevitable contamination of many foodstuffs. Normally, Staphylococcal food poisoning is caused by the enterotoxins. The most common associated foods are milk products including dried milk, ice cream, custard and cheese; poultry products; cold or cooked meats as well as canned foods. Often, food handlers pose risks, however, the environment in which food is kept (e.g. temperature, time) is more important, as high numbers of bacterial cells are required to produce enough enterotoxin. As such, adequate hygiene and precautions become necessary to prevent the multiplication of S. aureus in foods and keep the cell numbers low enough so that no hazards are presented to health. Several techniques have been developed for the examination of foods for S. aureus to show whether the numbers present are low or S. aureus is present/absent. For instance, selective agar (Baird-Parker, 1960) culture for the isolation of cells followed by tests for the production of coagulase and thermostable nuclease; biochemical testing; serotyping as well as toxin detection---considered to be more reliable. In this exercise, selective agar culture and tests for S. aureus will be utilized for both the enumeration and detection of the bacteria in the food sample supplied. The test is mainly based on the agglutination properties of most human strains of S. aureus with the test reagent including fibrinogen and rabbit lgG. As long as the pure culture of S. aureus react with the reagent, agglutination reactions are supposed to take place between the fibrinogen and bound coagulase; Fc portion of lgG and Protein A as well as specific lgG and capsular polysaccharide, where the bound coagulase and Protein A are possessed by most strains of S. aureus. Below is the microscopic picture of S. aureus. 5 nutrient agar # 2 plates (Oxoid CM55).
After 24h, typical S. aureus colonies are 1-1.5mm in diameter, black shiny, convex, with a narrow white entire margin, and are surrounded by clear zones (due to proteolysis) extending 2-5mm into the medium. Staphylococci other than S. aureus may grow and cause clearing in the medium within 24h but these usually also form a dense precipitate (probably caused by a lipase) within the cleared zone. S. aureus does not normally form such a precipitate until after 24h incubation and some strains do not do so even then.
Plates should be re-examined after 48h because some strains of S. aureus require 36h or more to produce typical colonies, and others, on primary isolation from foods, may require up to 48h to form typical colonies. (N.B. some strains from dairy products may fail to produce clear zones).
In fact, due to limited condition and time, the cultures were just examined once after 48h incubation.
Most human strains of S. aureus possess bound coagulase (present on the cell surface), extracellular staphylocoagulase and Protein A (present on cell surface). Protein A has the ability to bind to the Fc portion of immunoglobulin G (lgG). In some strains, capsular polysaccharide can mask both bound coagulase and Protein A and, thereby, prevent agglutination.
Staphtect Plus uses blue latex particles coated with both porcine fibrinogen and rabbit lgG (including specific antibodies against capsular polysaccharide antigen of S. aureus). When the reagent is mixed with S. aureus, rapid agglutination occurs through reactions between: 1) fibrinogen and bound coagulase; 2) Fc portion of lgG and Protein A; 3)specific lgG and capsular polysaccharide.
The Staphtect Plus kit includes a Test Reagent of a suspension of blue latex particles coated as above, a Control Reagent of a suspension of unsensitised blue latex particles and a Reaction card with white circle. a) 1 drop of Test latex suspension was dispensed onto one of the circles on the reaction card and a drop of Control latex suspension was then dispensed onto another circle. b) The bacteria growth (equivalent to 5 colonies) was picked up, using a sterile plastic loop, and mixed in the Test latex suspension. The suspension was then spreaded to cover the reaction circle (N.B. young (18-36h) cultures should be used) c) The bacteria growth was then mixed into the Control latex suspension with a separate plastic loop, then the suspension was spreaded over the reaction circle. d) The card was rocked back and forth for 20s and then observation was taken for agglutination under normal lighting conditions. e) The card was discarded to the disinfectant in the end.
As shown by the results above, due to the agglutination reaction by one of our own presumptive S. aureus cultures on the Test Reagent suspension, this culture could be considered to be a pure S. aureus culture.
As shown by table 1 that the total number of colonies counted on the selective plates is 216. However, due to the relative lower count on 0.1ml-inoculated plate, which is 16cfu and without the expected range of 30-300cfu/plate. As a result, only the sum of the counts from 1ml inoculum will be used for the calculation of the number of S. aureus g-1 ham.
According to the equation that: Colony count per g food=Total colony count/Dilution*Inoculum (ml); in this case, the total colony count is summed up by the counts from the three plates, which is calculated as: 61+68+71=200cfu; while the total inoculum is 1ml which has been dispensed onto 3 plates. The dilution is calculated as: Quantity of food (ml or g)/(Quantity of food(ml or g)+Volume of diluent). I.E. D(dilution)=25g/(25g+225ml)=10 -1.
So the Colony count per g food=200/(10 -1*1)=2000 (cfu/g).
I.E. there are approximately 2000cfu of S. aureus g -1 food.
As found from this exercise that the concentration of S. aureus in the food sample is approximately 2000cfu/g. According to the infective dose of S. aureus to reach a toxin level, which is around 10 5 cfu/g food, found in "MoonDragon 's Health Information & Dicussion/Food Poisoning", the contaminated ham sample used in this exercise could be considered, to some extent, still safe to consume, provided that it will be kept at low temperature for a very short period of time, say, another few hours. Furthermore, from the positive test results for S. aureus, we learnt that the cultures isolated from the B-P agar and growing on the Nutrient agar are pure, so we could say that the performances involved in enumeration and detection in this exercise are successful. Besides, from this exercise, we got a clear image of the techniques to enumerate and detect S. aureus by utilizing its agglutination properties.
Provided that the minimum count on each plate is 30cfu, while the maximum count on each plate is 300cfu.
To calculate the maximum concentration of S. aureus, we assuming that the colony count on each of the three plates that are inoculated separately from 1ml of the food suspension is all 300cfu, then the total colony count per g food can be calculated as: (300+300+300)/(10 -1*1)=9000cfu, so if the colony count per g food is 9000cfu, then there will be 90cfu on the plate inoculated with 0.1ml food suspension, which is within the range of 30-300cfu. So the maximum concentration of S. aureus should be 9000cfu/g food.
To calculate the minimum concentration of S. aureus, we assume that the colony count on each of the three plates that are inoculated separately from 1ml of the food suspension is all 30cfu, then the total colony count per g food can be calculated as: (30*3)/(10 -1*1)=900cfu. In this case, the colony count on the plate inoculated with 0.1ml food suspension will be 9, which is without the range of 30-300cfu. As a consequence, we assume that the colony count on 0.1ml-inoculated plate is 30, then the colony count per g food can be calculated as: 30/(10 -1*0.1)=3000. In this case, the colony count in 1ml inoculum will be 300, if this count is approximately divided by 3, then approximately there will be 100cfu on each of the separately-inoculated plates, which is within the range of 30-300cfu. So we could say the minimum concentration of S. aureus should be 3000cfu/g.
The first dilution is calculated as: Quantity of food(g)/(Quantity of food+Volume of.
Diluent(ml)), i.e. 50g/(50g+200ml)=2*10 -1.
The second dilution is calculated as: 1ml/(1ml+9ml)=0.1.
So total dilution is calculated as: 2*10 -1*0.1=2*10 -2.
As seen that, the count of 0.1ml inoculum is 10, which is below 30, so we just take the counts of 0.33ml inoculum to calculate the concentration of S. aureus.
According to the equation that: Colony count per g food=Total colony count/(Dilution*Volume plated); where the dilution is 10 -2, Volume plated=3*0.33ml=0.99ml. Total colony count=45+35+40=120.
So the colony count per g food=120/(10 -2*0.99)=12121cfu/g.
So we could report the concentration of S. aureus in 50g ham is 12121cfu/g.
