This exercise was undertaken to understand the existence of micro organisms in all areas of nature. The microbes were cultured from a variety of surfaces and environments. The main aims during the exercise were to understand the techniques used to cultivate microorganisms, and once isolated, to describe and identify the microorganisms present.
A detailed account of the procedure for this exercise can be found in the laboratory schedule book for the module 'introductory food microbiology.'.
The lid was taken off a nutrient agar plate and left exposed to air for the entirety of the practical. *.
After my hands were washed with soap, a moist sterile swab was rubbed over my palm and wiped over the surface of an agar plate. This plate was incubated at 30  C for 2 days.
Another moistened sterile cotton swab was rubbed against the bottom of my shoe and then spread onto a nutrient agar plate.*.
A small amount of soup powder was picked up with a sterile loop and spread over an agar plate. * *These three plates were incubated at 25  C for 4 days. (see page 3 for tablature form of results).
The agar plate exposed to air for the entirety of the practical showed some growth. Two different types of circular bacterial colonies were present. One was a pale white colour around 2mm in diameter and the other was a little larger, approximately 4mm in diameter and was a yellowy gold colour.
The plate which contained a substance swabbed from my hands, after they had been washed, had just three small colonies (about 2mm in diameter). One was a small yellow bacterial colony and the other two were small white colonies. A minute quantity of the yellow bacterial colony was extracted from this plate, with a small metal wire, and streaked over a sterile nutrient agar plate.
The agar plate which had a swab from the sole of my shoe developed a lot of growth, covering the whole plate. A variety of different colonies had grown. It seems the same yellow and white bacteria grew as on the other plates (discussed above). Two fluffy white colonies, approximately 1cm in diameter were also present along with a colony unlike the others which branched out into long hair-like filaments about 2-3cm long.
The soup powder had a few very small, (approximately 1mm in diameter), white dotted colonies.
This exercise has demonstrated the existence of a variety of microorganisms on different surfaces and in different environments. The agar plate exposed to the air for the entirety of the practical, proved the existence of airborne microorganisms. There were two different types of bacteria which grew on this plate. The pale white colonies were most likely from the genus Bacillus. These are able to survive, and become dispersed, on dust particles in the air.
The swab from my hand showed a similar growth of circular bacterial colonies as the agar plate exposed to the air. The yellow colonies were most likely to have been from the genus Staphylococcus which is often present on the skin and in mucous membranes of the nose and throat. A metal loop was used to lightly touch the yellow colony and re-streak it onto a fresh nutrient agar plate to isolate a pure culture. Once this has been incubated it will be possible to identify the microorganism under a light microscope.
The most diverse range of colonies that grew on the nutrient agar plates was the swab from the bottom of my shoe. This is probably due to the contact my shoe has with soil surfaces which provide a rich source of nutrients for microorganisms to grow. The colony of particular interest on this agar was the fungal growth which appeared in branches of filaments stretching out over the agar plate, competing for nutrients. Further examination could be performed to identify this microorganism by looking at a sample of the species under a light microscope.
On the nutrient agar plate which contains a small sample of soup powder it seems the same pale white colonies were present, (as have grown on all the plates in this practical). This could have been because of contamination of the agar plate, as it was opened and left exposed to the air for a longer time than is recommended. The environment that soup powder provides would not be a typical state for bacteria to grow in. It would be necessary to repeat the sampling of this food to confirm whether microorganisms do exist. The unsatisfactory result for this part of the exercise has highlighted the importance of having a sterile environment and sterile instruments as well as using appropriate techniques in the cultivation of microorganisms.
Bacterial colonies are circular in plan view because as they feed on the agar cells grow out towards the surrounding nutrients. If there is a part of the surrounding medium which is free from competing organisms the bacteria will grow out towards these nutrients, thus creating a circular pattern.
Mould colonies would grow in a spherical shape in liquid medium, and have fluffy edges which extend into the nutrients, enabling growth.
It is necessary to dry the surface of agar plates before they are streaked because many bacteria grow best on a fairly dry agar surface. Dry plates will also prevent liquid from running across the plates and dispersing the colonies, so that individual colonies can be isolated.
Agar plates containing bacterial cultures are inverted while they are incubated to prevent condensation from building up on the lid of the plate and falling down onto the colonies, producing a wet agar surface.
Streaking out a microbial culture produces isolated colonies by diluting a densely populated culture down to single colonies. This is performed by taking a very small sample of a densely populated culture and placing it in a small area of an agar plate, then sterilising a metal loop and streaking out two or three lines across the gel from this original colony. The metal loop is then sterilised again and streaks are made from the first set of streaks, this gradually decreases the amount of the original culture being moved across the agar gel. This is performed once more being careful not to touch the original colony.
