Erythropoietin, which is commonly known as EPO, is a glycoprotein hormone produced naturally in the kidney; it is the hormone that regulates the production of erythrocytes typically known as red blood cells. It consists of 165 amino acids, with four oligosaccharide side chains attached. It is found mainly in bone marrow where it acts as a cytokine to increase the production of erythrocytes. An increase in red blood cells increases the amount of oxygen that the blood can carry; it can also improve the body 's capacity to buffer lactic acid, which is the waste product from anaerobic respiration.
Stimuli such as bleeding or movement to a higher altitude trigger the body to release EPO into the bloodstream. The process of regulating a stable constant concentration of oxygen within the blood is a form of homeostasis. Normally EPO is found at very low concentrations in the blood plasma (~5 mol/L), but if around the pertituber cells in the kidney where EPO is mainly formed a low oxygen blood content is detected, a condition known as hypoxia, EPO is released increasing this concentration in the bloodstream. When EPO is released it acts by binding to a specific receptor (EpoR) found on the surface of red blood cell precursors in the bone marrow, this causes them to convert into mature red blood cells. The oxygen content of the blood is therefore increased and so this causes a decrease in the release of EPO, and homeostasis is maintained.
The introduction of recombinant EPO can have a major therapeutic benefit to sufferers of conditions such as chronic kidney disease that normally results in an EPO deficiency, which can then lead onto anemia. Anemia may also occur in cancer patients as a consequence of the disease or as an adverse effect from the chemotherapy treatment they receive. It is also used as an alternative for patients who require a blood transfusion or before surgery when a loss of blood is expected. The bone marrow produces more red blood cells so even if a loss of blood is experienced there is still enough to prevent the patient from dieing.
Recombinant EPO has played a major role in the treatment of many anemia patients, but also since its pharmaceutical release in the late 1980 's it has been used as a blood doping agent. Endurance athletes such as cyclists especially those who compete in multi-stage races such as the Tour de France can benefit from increased amounts of EPO as it can delay the decrease in red blood cell count that occurs during long periods of racing and so minimise fatigue. Other long distance athletes can also benefit from an increase in EPO as it increases the oxygen carrying capacity of the blood, the hematocrit level; this then increases the aerobic respiratory capacity of the athletes muscles, allowing them to compete for longer and so have a greater stamina.
As EPO is naturally produced by the body it is hard to detect, and when it was made available in the late 1980 's there was no way to detect its presence except if an athlete was caught in possession. But there are a number of side effects that a number of cyclists at the time started to display, such as nose bleeds caused by a thickening of the blood as it contains a larger number of erythrocytes, this causes difficulty in its passage through thin capillaries. A slower resting heart rate and a decreased white blood cell count that leads onto a suppressed immune system.
The International Olympic committee (IOC) issued its first list of substances that are banned from use by athletes in 1967, and began drug testing of athletes in the 1968 Olympics. From this Olympics the committee has required cities hosting the Olympic Games to provide adequate facilities in which drug testing can take place.
The World anti-doping agency (WADA) not finished !!!.
EPO has been banned since the early 1900 's and a detection method for its presence has been in force since 2000.Scientists from the French national anti-doping laboratory, endorsed by the WADA, developed a test to separately detect pharmaceutical recombinant EPO from its nearly identical natural form of the hormone, this has been made achievable as the available brands of EPO are made within cultured animal cells, causing them to have a different pattern of oligosaccharide residues meaning in theory the different forms can be easily distinguished from each other. But this method has come under serious criticism in its ability to separate pharmaceutical EPO from the naturally occurring form usually found in an athlete 's urine after strenuous exercise.
The testing relies on techniques such as gel electrophoresis more specifically the Western blot technique and isoelectric focusing. But before this can be conducted the urine sample must be collected, this is achieved by following well defined and tested procedures which ensures the privacy of the individual, sterile equipment and protective clothing are used in order to prevent cross contamination. Chain of Custody documentation is also written which details the sample 's pathway from the individual to the analyst in order to avoid legal action. Two samples are taken labeled sample "A" and sample "B", sample "A" is analysed straightaway and sample "B" is frozen and stored. Sample "B" is only tested on if sample "A" produces a positive result. The laboratories that perform this testing must have been accredited to the ISO 17025 standard.
Before the samples are analysed they firstly need to be prepared, this involves a long sequence of events. The sample is firstly rapidly cooled or frozen, and then homogenized this can be achieved in various ways such as sonication this is applying energy in the form of sound usually ultrasound to break up the sample, or by applying a mechanical force, or finally by causing the cells to be lysed (destroyed) using high salt buffers (150mM). The produced homogenate, which contains the whole cell, can then be analysed, or broken down further by centrifugation to isolate different parts of the cells. The sample is then boiled in a buffer solution for up to five minutes, the buffer solution normally contains a mixture of beta-mercaptoethanol, a type of anionic lipholic detergent called Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and glycerol. The boiling causes the protein to denature and unfold completely; the SDS then coats the sample with a negative charge and the beta-mercaptoethanol prevents any sulfide bridges from being reformed and lastly the glycol 's purpose is to add density to the sample. The sample can then be placed into a well in the Polyacrylamide gel; the added density causes the sample to fall to the bottom of the well.
Electrophoresis is the migration of a charged particle in an electrical field, the technique works as different solutes move at different velocities depending on their mass and charge. Small and highly charges species have a high mobility and heavy and minimally charged species have low mobility through the electrical field. Isoelectric focusing is a type of electrophoresis that involves the separation of amphoteric sample components in a pH gradient. Firstly a pH gradient is set up involving an anode (low pH) and a cathode (high pH), an electric field is then applied which causes the amphoteric components to migrate. The negative charged components move toward the positive anode and the positively charged components move toward the cathode. If we consider the net negative charge movement, the migration encounters a decrease in the pH of its surroundings, and therefore becomes protonated. Eventually a pH is encountered where its net charge is equal to a position known as the isoelectric point, at this point the migration ceases. Each component in the sample moves to its respective isoelectric point and stops moving, the isoelectric points may occur over the whole pH range.
The electrophoresis is carried out in a Polyacrylamide gel, gels such as this act as anticonvection stabilisers, these lower the thermally driven convection currents that occur in the elecrophoretic medium. They also create permanent pH gradients by binding together specific groups within the gel. Polyacrylamide gels are prepared by polymerisation of acrylamide using N, N'-Methylene-bis-acrylamide as a cross linker, and ammonium persulfate as an initiator: -.
The sample is placed into a well formed in the gel next to which another well is prepared which contains pharmaceutical EPO that acts as a reference to which the sample can be compared.
The proteins must be transferred onto a Nitrocellulose membrane in order for them to be made antibody accessible, this is achieved by placing the membrane right next to the gel and applying a current via plates placed on the gel and membrane. This causes the charged particles to move from the gel onto the membrane producing a copy of the pattern formed on the gel, this process is termed "blotting". Nitrocellulose binds to all types of protein, it is non-specific, but because of this the membrane has to be placed into a milk protein solution, which prevents binding between the membrane and the antibody used for the probing of specific proteins from occurring.
