Throughout history, two methodologies occur repeatedly in the pursuit for scientific knowledge, these are Rationalism and Empiricism. But what do these philosophies involve and which philosophers supported them. This essay aims to identify the key features of these philosophies, their problems and the contributions of the titled philosophers to these ideas.
Rationalism is a philosophical view that was originally developed by Rene Descartes, and is often known as Continental rationalism, as its creator was French. Rationalism states that all knowledge, including scientific, can be obtained using reasoning and deductive logic, after the initial establishment of a self-evident truth. Such a self-evident truth may be a mathematical axiom, for example; when two parallel straight lines are crossed by a third, then the opposite interior angles are equal. From this and similar foundations everything we observe around us could be logically deduced.
Cushing 1998, p.7.
In contrast to this view, was Empiricism, or British Empiricism as it became know due to two of its large contributors Francis Bacon and John Locke, both of whom were British. Empiricism states that all knowledge can only come from experiment and sensory experience. It is considered the basis of modern science, but is not without flaw. Alongside the doctrine of Empiricism, is induction. Induction is a process of reasoning, from specifics, such as particular facts to generalised rules. Here is such an example taken from Cushing; 'from the fact that all men in past ages who have ever existed have died, we might induce the general proposition that all men including those still alive and even those yet to be born, are mortal.'.
Cushing 1998, p.9.
Descartes established rationalism in the 1600 's. To extract knowledge using this philosophy Descartes would first begin by taking apart everything he could hold as untrue, such as things that he observed; he used the example of dreaming, he said that your mind sees things in dreaming that are often quite untrue, and this implied we cannot trust our senses. Descartes then attempts to establish a self-evident truth, and from this he uses a method of logic deduction to advance his knowledge. In his works 'Regulae' Descartes published rules for which he believed man could obtain certain knowledge. Below is an example of his work;.
Cushing, 1998 p.12.
From these rules Descartes, initially arrived at a single truth, this was that he could deny his own existence and yet he would still exist, and is the origin of his most famous quote; 'cogito ergo sum'. Also from these rules and the processes of logical reasoning Descartes attempt to prove the existence of God.
Wilkepedia, Descartes, p.2.
There is a clear and inherent flaw in rationalism, its stems from self-evident truths. Rationalism begins by making an apparently obvious statement that is held true without question. The former example is ideal; of two parallel straight lines crossed by a third, to make the two interior angles equal. For everyday purposes this most certainly is true, but in the early 20 th century when Einstein introduced his general theory of relativity, he found that non-Euclidean geometry held true. This implied that human knowledge could not be discovered from logic and deductive reasoning alone, and to some degree all human knowledge is imperfect. Even Descartes in his later works, such as Discourses on the Method, conceded that deductive reasoning alone could n't provide man with all knowledge.
Bacon lived around Descartes era, he was British and key to the development of empiricism, hence the term British Empiricism. Bacon was able to study at trinity college, Cambridge from the age of 12; he studied the works of Aristotle, and believed that his method of deducing data from self-evident axioms had led to little scientific advancement. Bacon published a works titled 'Novum Organum' which translates as 'new logical works'. In these works Bacon published a number of Aphorisms that were rules for man 's role in science and how we could make the most of science, including the technique of induction. Below are a few of his key aphorisms;.
Novum Organum, Bacon, Aphorism 1.
In the above statement Bacon is saying that man is but an observer of nature and so can only make judgements on what he observes and cannot presume beyond this. Bacon goes onto say;.
In this aphorism Bacon attempts to explain his ideal scientific method, is analogous to the bee, which collects the natural material, manipulates it in its own manner, and then uses it for its own purposes. Bacon now identifies the induction process; we must collect our experiences and observations together and analyse these, then act on the most evident facts. Bacon continued by saying that we must make small steps from fact to axiom to law, using the inductive reasoning method. However there was still a problem presented by this method of science, and became known as the problem of induction. The problem of induction occurs in moving from specific instances to general cases, and how and when can this be done.
David Hume born in 1711 was a British philosopher, economist, historian and essayist. He was a passionate empiricist who was well aware of the problem of induction. Hume puts forth his view on empiricism in his works 'An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding', here he discusses idea of causality, where he stated that no two events could be connected, but there could be an association and also how sensory data must precede theory and hypothesis. Here is an extract of Hume 's work on causality;.
Cushing 1998, p.36.
Hume continued by applying these ideas to the inductive scientific method;.
After Hume had proposed the problem of the inductive method, he then postulated two possible justifications, the first was a matter of logical necessity; the future must resemble the past, but then Hume pointed out the we can perceive an incoherent future, which is not connected to the past. Hume concluded that nothing requires the inductive method to be logical.
Secondly Hume postulated that induction has worked successfully in the past and so should work again in the future. Hume concluded that this postulate was circular in nature and so is no true means of justification.
Karl Popper born in 1902, was a philosopher educated in Vienna, and focused in the areas of science, sociology and politics. In the area of science, Popper 's philosophy was that of critical rationalism, understanding that scientific progress came from human imagination, and the need to solve problems. Popper was not satisfied with the inductive method and realised the inherent problems mentioned above. In his book titled 'Conjectures and Refutations', Popper discusses the importance of a good scientific theory, being one that can risk being falsified, this is known as falsification. Below is an excerpt from Popper 's 'Conjectures and Refutations'.
This was taken from Cushing, 1998 p.37-8.
Popper then goes onto say that any truly scientific theory will make definite predictions that can be experimentally tested with the possibility of being falsified. If the null-results are observed, the theory has been falsified and is rejected. If the theory shows the correct results, it will be accepted until such a time that it conflicts with experimental evidence and is falsified. Popper used the example of General Relativity;.
Making reference to the theories of Marx, Freud and Adler.
Referring to Eddington 's trip to view a solar eclipse, and the curvature of space.
Popper concluded with the following statement;.
Cushing 1998, p.38.
And today almost 100 years on, we seem to find this philosophy of science the most practical, in terms of scientific progress.
In conclusion we have seen the neither rationalism nor empiricism, can dominate as theories for scientific knowledge alone. Currently the most progressive philosophy in science seems to be that of a hypothetico-deductive method, which has the possibility of being falsifiable. However often because a model is found to be falsifiable does not mean it is refuted often it is modified to explain the new evidence. This process of modification raises the question; Is what we observe in science, the truth or just a convenient mathematical model that represents reality?.
