The Bohr model of the atom has electrons placed around the nucleus much like planets orbiting the sun in the heliocentric solar system. However, these electrons can only exist on set energy levels and not between orbits. Despite the Bohr model having many flaws, it has been considered a success and is still taught despite being proved incorrect. This essay shall show some of the flaws of the model as well as explain how it has become a success despite or because of these flaws.
Prior to the Rutherford-Bohr models of the atom, J J Thompson came up with the idea of the plum pudding atom. This consisted of electrons and protons placed randomly within the atom much like a plum pudding, they were kept in place by the equilibrium of the magnetic repulsions and attractions, between each electron and photon.
However, this was discredited by Rutherford a few years later.
Rutherford, along with Marsden and Geiger did an experiment, in which they fired high energy alpha particles at a sheet of gold foil. Rutherford placed a fluorescent screen around the foil that would detect the scattered alpha particles. As expected most particles simply travelled straight through the foil, however some were scattered at acute angles and a minute number even deflected straight back.
This brought Rutherford to the conclusion, that the atom was mainly made up of nothing, but had an area of dense mass in the middle, now known as the nucleus. He also deduced that this area must be positively charged as it deflected the positively charged alpha particles. He was therefore able to come to the conclusion that the negatively charged electrons must orbit around this nucleus, hence discrediting Thompson 's model.
Rutherford 's "classical" model of the atom, consisted of the positively charged nucleus in the middle, with the electrons placed on random orbits around the nucleus, much like in the heliocentric model of the solar system. However, the shortcomings of this model were obvious from the start, and were spotted by Danish physicist Niels Bohr, who was born in 1913. Bohr realised that this classical model of an atom does not satisfy laws of quantum mechanics. If the electrons were to be spiralling around the nucleus, they would be accelerating centripetally, this would mean that the electrons would emit electro-magnetic waves, however this was not the case. More interesting, was that due to the acceleration the electrons would also lose energy and therefore velocity, this would mean the electrons would spiral in towards the centre of the atom, destroying it.
Bohr came up with his own model of the atom, and it was the first which combines the quantum world of Planck and Einstein to the more classical model of the atom, as used by Rutherford. Bohr 's model of the atom had electrons still orbiting the nucleus, but instead of being placed randomly, they could only exist on certain energy levels. This means that each electron has a certain set energy and therefore does n't emit radiation making it spiral into the nucleus. "The  'stable' orbits of the electrons correspond to certain fixed amounts of energy, each a multiple of the basic quantum, but there were no in-between orbits because they would require fractional amounts of energy". (1).
In the Bohr model the electrons can be excited by the absorption of the light photon, which moves it up to a higher energy level. However, this makes the electron unstable due to a free space now in the lower level (the ground state). Therefore the electron will fall back to the lower energy level, releasing energy in the form of a photon.
The wavelength of this photon depends on the change in energy level which is different for each element. Bohr stated that two electrons could be present in the inner orbit, with eight needed on the rest, if this value is not eight then the atom will be unstable, looking for another atom to join up with.
Despite this model by Bohr having obvious flaws, it has proved to be extremely successful. One reason for this is that it was the first model of the atom, which linked quantum ideas to the classical ideas of the atom, and in the process answered the problems of radiating energy and spiralling electrons. The biggest success of this model came with the simple hydrogen atom, which is the most elementary of particles with just electron orbiting the nucleus. The calculated spectral lines for this hydrogen model, matched the observed spectral lines, it even went as far as to explain why these spectral lines occur. However, another success of the Bohr model was caused by a slight miscalculation. The predicted spectral line included an unknown line that had not be previously observed, this error in calculation caused scientists to look for a new element that this line could be. After vigorous observations an element was found whose spectral line was just a fraction away from that predicted by the Bohr hydrogen model. This element was Deuterium and this was seen as the greatest success of the Bohr model. Using the spectral lines that would be caused by the Bohr model of other elements, scientists were able to predict the existence of numerous other elements, many of which were later found.
Further success came from Bohr 's idea that only two electrons can be on the ground energy level with eight needed on higher energy ones. This meant that if there were not eight electrons in the outer orbit, then the element would be unstable. The element would want to become stable and it could do this by gaining, losing or sharing its electrons on the outer energy level so that the number of electrons comes to eight. This process explained the chemical interaction that occurs when two elements meet, with the stable elements being non reactive and unstable elements being more reactive, depending on how many electrons it either needs to gain or lose.
This can be seen in water (H2O), which is the chemical interaction of one oxygen molecule and two hydrogen. The oxygen atom has only six electrons in its outer shell and therefore wants to gain two, whereas each hydrogen has one free space. Therefore instead of stealing an electron they simple join together and share the electrons in the outer shells. This idea, predicted which elements would be the most reactive, such as potassium, because these atoms only need to lose or gain one electrons to become stable, and therefore react much easier.
Despite all these successes of the Bohr model they were far outweighed by its flaws. Although some of the extra spectral line that were predicted by the Bohr model were later observed, such as Deuterium, many did n't, and there were far too many predicted spectral that had not been accounted for. These flaws were probably due to there being no theory behind the energy levels of each element, with Bohr using quantum numbers that simply matched observations. This meant that Bohr 's idea of energy being absorbed and emitted in the form of a proton, was only accurate for hydrogen atom, which has only one proton and electron with no neutrons, and did n't work for any more complicated elements. This meant that many changes were needed to the Bohr-Rutherford model; one such change was made by Somerfield, who spent years manipulating the Bohr model in order for it to match the observed calculations.
The success of the Bohr model is partly due to and partly despite of its obvious flaws. "His model turns out to have been wrong in almost every respect, but it provided a transition to a genuine quantum theory of the atom, and as such it was invaluable" (2). This is the reason why Bohr 's model was successful because of its flaws; it linked classical physics to quantum physics in the atom, giving scientists a new way of looking at the model of the atom; its obvious flaws also challenged other scientists to improve them. One such scientist was the German physicist Erwin Schr  dinger; he believed that the problem with Bohr 's model might be in confining the electrons to specific orbits. He believed that the answer may lye in the electromagnetic energy sometimes behaving like a particle (electron in orbit), but also sometimes behaving like a waveform. The evidence for these particles sometimes behaving like a wave came, from the emission of a photon when the electrons move down an energy level. Scientists knew that photons can sometimes behave like waves as interference (superposition) occurs when two photons travel in the same path.
These waveforms would have a set wavelength and therefore have a set frequency and energy using the equation, E =hf, where h = Planck 's constant, this enabled scientists to predict the exact energy levels that the electrons lye on. However, as the electrons now behave as waves, scientists could not calculate exactly where they lye and therefore this is only an estimate. To solve this problem instead of having the well defined orbits of Bohr 's model Schr  dinger used probability clouds (orbitals), and he could predict where on the orbital the electron will be. Some areas of the cloud had a high probability of having an electron and others a low probability.
Schr  dinger 's model was very useful as its electron clouds allowed it be able to solve problems that Bohr 's model was not able to do, this allowed scientists to get a better understanding of how electrons behave in chemical reactions.
Bohr 's model of the atom became useful despite its flaws, because it 's classical structure is very easy to visualise at a basic level, with the electrons on set energy levels and energy either being absorbed or emitted in the form of a photon. It also introduced the idea of quantum mechanics into the model structure of an atom, which allowed future scientists to improve Bohr 's ideas.
Bohr 's model, which structures the atom in a classical way with electrons orbiting the nucleus but behaving using quantum mechanics, with the electrons on set energy levels has become extremely successful partly because of and partly despite its obvious flaws. The obvious flaws in the model have challenged future scientists such as Schr  dinger to adapt Bohr 's model and improve is usefulness. However, Bohr 's model does have its own important features, such as being extremely basic and therefore easy to understand at an elementary level, it also is the first model which links the classical world of the atom to quantum mechanics, which has helped develop people 's understanding of how electrons work, for example in various chemical reactions.
