This paper is about the expanding universe as we know it today. It looks at the best known evidence modern cosmology has to determine why physicists, scientists, and also aspiring cosmologists believe the universe is in a state of expansion. It includes detailed descriptions of the observations made by Vesto Slipher and Edwin Hubble, and also reasons behind the observations, written in a manner that is easy to comprehend. Where possible, diagrams have been used to give a visual aid to the text.
How do we know the universe is expanding? What may seem as an apparently simple question, is in actual fact, something that people have been trying to understand for many decades. I would love to be able to give a short, easy answer to the question but unfortunately that just is n't possible. There are many theories and much evidence that relates to the expanding universe model, so by uniting it all I hope to convey the ideas of modern cosmology regarding the expansion of the universe.
Before we go into the weird and wonderful depth of trying to explain this question, we first have to understand what is meant when we refer to the word 'universe'. The universe is everything. It is all the galaxies, stars black holes and planets, right down to matter, particles and energy. It is the "total sum of all that exists, the physical system that encapsulates all known space" (reference no.5). But where did it come from? It all stems from the Big Bang theory, which suggests that if the universe is expanding, there must have been a point (ie right at the beginning of time) where the universe existed as a single particle, of infinite density. It is important to remember that the Big Bang theory represents not only the beginning of the universe, but also the beginning of time itself, about 15 billion years ago. As Stephen Hawking suggests, the beginning of real time would have been a singularity, at which the laws of physics would have broken down.
The development of general relativity was the basis from which the expanding universe could be comprehended. Einstein 's equations could not be solved to give a static universe, even when he added his cosmological constant (later deemed the biggest mistake of his life) to keep the universe static. During the early 1900 's, the American astronomer Vesto Slipher made the original discovery that distant galaxies were receding from the Earth, by using photographic spectroscopy.
Slipher 's discovery was the first landmark observation that distant galaxies are moving rapidly away from us wherever you look, ie the universe is expanding. But how were the observations made? The answer is complex yet simple. It would be an idea to familiarise ourselves with the Doppler effect before we tackle the question. The easiest way to understand the Doppler effect is to look at why an ambulance siren changes pitch as it gets closer to and then further away from the observer. The Doppler effect is a shift in the frequency and wavelength of waves which is the result of the source or receiver moving with respect to a medium, or even a moving medium. As the ambulance approaches the observer, the sound waves from the siren become compressed towards the observer. This compression of waves causes the wavelength to decrease and therefore the frequency to increase, which results in an increase in the siren 's pitch. In contrast, as the ambulance recedes from the observer, the wavelength of the sound waves increases hence a decrease in the frequency, and a decrease in the pitch of the siren. In a nutshell, when the siren is coming towards you, more sound waves are entering your ear each second as opposed to if the siren was stationary.
This increase and decrease in wavelength correspond to terms regarding  'shift'. As the wavelength decreases, the frequency increases and the waves are therefore said to be blueshifted. Similarly, as the frequency decreases, the waves are said to be redshifted, as shown in Figure 1. Why this is, I will explain later.
So how is the Doppler effect related to cosmology and the expanding universe model? Like sound, light waves have frequencies and wavelengths corresponding to those in the electromagnetic spectrum. Visible light has a frequency ranging from four to seven trillion (ie 10 12) hertz. Different frequencies in this range is what the naked eye sees as different colours. The 'bluer' end of the spectrum has the highest frequencies whereas the 'redder' end of the spectrum has the lowest frequencies. This brings me back to the reasoning behind the terms redshift and blueshift. In a blueshift, the frequency of light is increased, and the light is therefore shifted towards the bluer end of the spectrum. The opposite happens in a redshift, the light 's frequency decreases and it is shifted towards the red end of the spectrum.
The way light behaves when travelling through a glass medium is now very important to Slipher 's findings. As Isaac Newton discovered, light from the sun breaks down into its individual spectral colours when it passes through a glass prism. When using a telescope, the lens acts as the prism and when individual stars or galaxies are viewed, as with the prism, the light 's spectrum can be observed.
Atoms emit or absorb light of certain definite frequencies in this spectrum. The frequencies, known as 'lines', of each and every atom, form a characteristic pattern (as shown in Figure 2) that we can use to work out exactly which elements are present in a star 's atmosphere. Now we know that the patterns of lines produced by the spectra of light from remote galaxies are the same as those produced by the elements in the Earth 's atmosphere.
What Hubble observed, just like Slipher, was that the spectral lines which would have had a certain wavelength and frequency on Earth, in fact had longer wavelengths, hence the shift towards the red end of the spectrum.
Not only did Hubble observe this characteristic redshift from a single galaxy, but from the vast majority of galaxies he was measuring. Only very rarely did he observe a blueshift from a galaxy. Hubble also discovered that the size of the redshift is not random, it is directly proportional to the galaxy 's distance away from us. The further away the galaxy is from us, the faster it is receding. What Hubble did, with the help of his assistant Milton Humason in 1929, was put the findings into a mathematical form to create evidence that the universe is expanding. This then became known as Hubble 's Law.
Another very convincing piece of evidence regarding the expanding universe is that put forward by Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson. Although first predicted by George Gamow in 1948, and by Ralph Alpher and Robert Herman in 1950, the existence of cosmic microwave background radiation was first observed by Penzias and Wilson in 1965. The radiation was detected when Penzias and Wilson were building a radio receiver. They believed the detection was a source of noise but thought otherwise when they could not get rid of it.
What they found was that the noise existed when they pointed the receiver in any direction, ie the radiation was found to be uniform. The Big Bang theory states that the universe was much smaller, denser and therefore hotter. The expanding universe model states that as the universe expands, it cools. The radiation (produced by the Big Bang) was measured to have a temperature of 2.7 K, which is exactly what was predicted by the expanding universe model.
