To investigate the effects of friction on the processes of upsetting and heading of aluminium samples. (See Appendix 2).
The results of the 'heading' process for the un-lubricated (Graph 1) and lubricated (Graph 2) specimens reveal a different effect of friction on the two samples of aluminium. It is observed that the lubricated sample, for a given load, deforms at a faster rate than the un-lubricated sample. Thus, the effect of friction on the process of aluminium heading is to impede the deformation or heading process.
The results for the upsetting process, for the un-lubricate (Graph 3) and well-lubricated (Graph 4) specimen demonstrate that the process of aluminium upsetting is precipitated in the absence of friction and by implication limited by the presence of friction. It is also notable that the deformation rate discrepancy between the un-lubricated and well lubricated samples is greater than in that between the un-lubricated and lubricated specimen in the heading experiment. This is a possible effect of the increased lubrication for sample 4 in the upsetting test, where the top as well as the bottom of the sample are lubricated. This difference is expected to reduce interfacial friction and as a result further precipitate the process of deformation. (?).
The material constants of n and K are the work hardening index and the strain constant, respectively. For the well-lubricated sample, the logarithmic plot yields the tabulated values for the constants. Materials with large n values experience larger changes in strength when cold worked. The obtained work hardening index n and strain constant K when compared to published data are confirmed to be of reasonable range for Aluminium. Strength And Fracture of Engineering Solids, Felbeck & Atkins, p.38 (1996).
Ibid, Appendix 3, p.505.
Graph 5 shows the variation of diameter as load increases. Generally, it can be observed that the relationship between the load and circumferential deformation is linear. More specifically, it can be seen that the lubricated specimen deforms at a greater rate indicating that it is more susceptible to deformation across its diameter than the un-lubricated specimen. For the given final load then it is evident that the corresponding diameter of the lubricated specimen is greater than that of the un-lubricated sample by a value of 0.74 mm. Furthermore, the discrepancy between the values for a given load is progressively greater.
Graph 6 shows the variation of length as load increases. As expected, the length of the specimen is inversely proportional to the loading. Again, it is observed that the rate of deformation is generally greater for the lubricated sample owing to the reduction in friction. However, the rate of length deformation appears to be slower than that of diameter deformation. This is most possibly related to the effect of the passion ratio of the aluminium sample.
For the upsetting tests the results generally indicate similar behaviour. That is, the rate of deformation is increased with lubrication, or the reduction in friction. For the upsetting test, both ends of the specimen are lubricated. By implication of this reduction in friction the deformation of diameter and length can be seen to improve in relation to the un-lubricated sample.
Derived Yield Stress:
Un-Lubricated.
Lubricated.
Empirical Yield Stress (graphical approximate):
Un-Lubricated 304 MPa.
Lubricated 299 MPa.
The empirical data corresponds reasonably to the theoretical data, although the empirical-lubricated yield strength is somewhat lower than expected. The hardness tests (see Table 6 show that the lubricated sample exhibits a higher Brinnel Hardness than the un-lubricated sample. This is possibly a result of the greater proportion of compression in the aluminium after the final (80 kN) loading for the lubricated sample in contrast with the un-lubricated sample. As the aluminium is progressively compressed, the volume becomes denser and by implication the hardness is greater. The overall effect then can be said to be a consequence of the level of interfacial fiction, in this low friction. Low friction therefore leads to greater compression and therefore greater hardness (?). An effect of friction is also 'barreling' as observed in the sample. This is eliminated or mitigated in lubricated and homogenous deformation.
The upset forging experiments undertaken are by definition compression processes. It is observed that the phenomena of 'necking', as found in tensile processes, is absent in the compression experiments and instead the effect of 'barreling' is observed. The explanation for the suppression of necking in the compression tests lies in examining the nature of the stresses experienced by the sample. In a tensile process the axial stresses are positive and the circumferential stresses are negative thus resulting in tension and compression, respectively, and by implication the effect of necking. In a compressive process, however, the direction vectors are inversed. That is, the axial stresses, by virtue of compression, become negative (compressive) while the circumferential stresses become positive (tensile). As a consequence, necking is replaced with barreling.
Cross-sectional areas of samples from the upset forging tests are illustrated above. In each case the grain flow profile is different. For the un-lubricated specimen the grain flow generally appears finer (or denser). A distinctive feature of the un-lubricated sample is the splitting of the flow as it approaches both ends of the cross section. This is possibly an effect of the presence of interfacial friction as the cross-section is compressed.
For the lubricated sample the profile appears to be almost homogenous. The flow profile is consistent throughout exhibiting no splitting near the ends. However, flow appears to be denser near the ends, where the barreling of the sample would coincide.
It was found (see Table 5) that the final diameter of the well-lubricated specimen was greater than that for the un-lubricated specimen. Observing the flow profiles in conjunction with this finding, it may be posited that this result is a consequence of the more even flow across the section of the specimen and by implication the higher stress magnitude(?). Consequently, owing to the more congruent flow in the case of the lubricated sample and the resulting higher stress magnitude across the section, the process of upsetting and deformation is made more efficient in the absence of friction.
The investigation into the effects of friction on upset forging has demonstrated that friction serves to impede the deformation of aluminium while lubrication has the opposite effect. This was proven in the load-reduction variations, where lubrication was found to precipitate the rate of length reduction of compressed aluminum. Furthermore, the sections corresponding to the lubricated and un-lubricated samples were analysed for grain boundary flow and the effects of friction were also manifested. It was suggested that the lubrication and consequentially the absence of interfacial friction had resulted in the homogenous and congruous flow profile signifying the stress magnitude across the section. The even flow pattern of the lubricated sample and its positive implications on material deformation was therefore linked to the absence of interfacial friction (lubricated sample) (?). The visual examination of specimen revealed, in general, that while frictionless upsetting resulted in even deformation, the presence of interfacial friction causes un-even deformation or barreling.
