This experiment involved loading four different structures with weights until a member of the framework buckled. These results where then compared with a calculated theoretical value. A difference in the two values showed that some errors were made during the experiment, and this highlighted the limitations of physical modelling for structural analysis.
To determine the maximum load that four different frameworks can support before one member begins to buckle, and to compare this with the theoretical buckling loads.
A number of instruments and apparatus were used to conduct the experiment. Instruments used included the aluminium members used to construct the various frameworks, various different weights to hang of the framework, a micrometer to measure the breadth and depth of the members, and a metre rule used to measure the length of the aluminium members.
The apparatus used was an experimental rig, capable of being set up in a variety of ways. The aluminium members were attached to the rig in different positions, allowing the construction of the four different frameworks.
The same method of experimentation was used for each framework. The structures of the frames are shown below in figure 1:
The first stage of the experiment was to construct one of the frameworks detailed above. This was done through a series of hinges attached to the ends of the aluminium members, allowing pins to connect members to the experimental rig or to each other. An example of this is displayed below:
Once the framework was constructed, a weight hanger was placed on the end of one of the struts. The position of the weight hanger is shown by the arrows (W   ) in figure 1. A series of weights where then hung of the structure until it was determined that one of the members had buckled. Before the experiment began it was determined that the members would be perceived as buckled once they could no longer be returned to their normal shape. This weight was then noted.
By studying the structures beforehand it was possible to predict which members would be under compression and subsequently buckle. These members are highlighted in figure 3:
The weight measured in the experiment could then be compared with the theoretical weight needed. The theoretical buckling load of a member is given by the formula.
A number of assumptions were made during this experiment. It was first assumed that the weights used to test the structure were the weight that was stated. There was no time to weigh each weight so it was assumed they were the exact weight stated.
A second assumption was that the micrometer used to measure the depth and breadth of the aluminium members was calibrated. There was no time to test the device so it was assumed that it was 100% accurate.
It was also assumed that the brass or stainless steel ends of the members would not affect the results. The different material at the end of the members would affect the Young 's modulus value. It was assumed that this would have a negligible affect.
A fourth assumption was that all the aluminium members were straight. This was especially an issue once frameworks were constructed with previously buckled members. Slightly bent members would hold a lower load, but it was assumed all members were straight.
Following the method stated in the 'Materials and Method' section, the following observations were made:
The results achieved can be easily explained. Structure 2 could support the most weight due to the member that was under compression. Looking at figure 1 (Materials and Methods), the member under compression in structure 2 was T1, a shorter member then those under compression in structure 1 and 4. A shorter member is more stable and can hold a higher load. Structure 2 could hold more load then structure 3 due to the added members in structure 3 placing T5 under greater compression.
Subsequently structures 1 and 4 supported the lowest weight due to the long length of the members under compression.
In order to calculate the theoretical buckling load (P CRIT), it was necessary to measure the depth and breadth of the buckled members. The results observed were:
The length of the buckled members was also required and the following observations were made using a metre rule:
It was also possible to calculate the lengths of the above methods using trigonometry (see appendix 1 for full calculations). This provided greater accuracy then a metre rule. The results achieved were:
In order to compare the buckling weight achieved in the experiment with the theoretical buckling load, a number of calculations were made. The P CRIT was calculated for structure 1 and 2:
Structure 1.
Equilibrium theory: Assume all struts are in tension.
Replace T1 with the vertical and horizontal component:
Resolve vector vertically:
NB. Negative answer gained - T1 in compression.
Resolve vector horizontally:
NB. Positive answer gained - T2 in tension.
Therefore, so, where,.
The weight achieved in the experiment was 1.1kg; this shows a 0.3kg difference from the theoretical value.
Structure 2.
Equilibrium theory: Assume all struts are in tension.
Replace T2 with the vertical and horizontal component:
Resolve vector vertically:
NB. Positive answer gained - T2 in tension.
Resolve vector horizontally:
NB. Negative answer gained - T1 in compression.
Therefore, so, where,.
The weight achieved in the experiment was 2.9kg; this shows a 1.17kg difference from the theoretical value.
A couple of qualitative and quantitative errors may have been made in this experiment. Possible qualitative errors made include the assumed accuracy of the micrometer. There was no time to calibrate the micrometer so it was assumed the instrument was 100% accurate. If this was not the case then the measurements for the breadth and depth of the members may not have been accurate.
A couple of quantitative errors may also have been made. With no previous experience of sing a micrometer, wrong observations may have been made. This would have led to inaccurate values.
It was also quite difficult to determine the exact point of buckling. This may have led to qualitative errors when determining the point of buckling. This may be reflected in the difference in the theoretical buckling load and the weight achieved in the experiment.
The aims of the experiment were completed, with the theoretical buckling loads of the aluminium members along with experimental weights calculated. The final results for the experiment were:
The results show some discrepancies between the theoretical and experimental results. In the case of the first structure, the difference in results is quite small (0.33kg or 3.33N). 3.33N is a low force and so this result does not need to be analysed too deeply. However, there are a number of possible reasons why the theoretical load is higher. The most likely explanation is a possible error made when determining the point of buckling. When the framework in structure 1 was first tested, the group were still unclear as how to determine the point of buckling, and as a result the structure had gone well past the point of buckling before the experiment stopped. Realising this error the experiment was repeated immediately. This caused the aluminium member to be slightly deformed and in the second run was not perfectly straight. This would have caused the member to be able to take fewer loads, and is a possible explanation for the results achieved. Overall, the results gained were in an acceptable degree of accuracy.
The results for structure 2 show greater discrepancy with a difference in results of 1.17kg or 11.52N. This difference is slightly too high to declare the experimental load gained as being to an acceptable accuracy. There are number of possible explanations for the large difference, many of which are mentioned in the assumptions and error analysis sections. It is likely that instead of one large error, a number of small errors all contributed to the difference. As with the framework in structure 2, the aluminium members were already slightly bent. By this point there had already been two previous experiments (structure 1 tested twice), and this may have resulted in the members being able to carry less load.
Further possible errors include the brass or stainless steel ends of the aluminium members. This would have affected the theoretical load calculation with differing Young 's Modulus values. Whilst this may have only had a small affect on the theoretical load calculated it may have contributed to the difference in results.
The framework may also not have been properly constructed. For example, the way the members were clipped into position may have resulted in the 45   angle stated in figure 1 being slightly less or more. Again this would not have had a large affect on the experimental load, but may well have made a contribution to the difference.
It is also possible that the weights were placed on the structure in a forceful nature. For example, the weight placed on the structure to take the overall weight up to 2.9kg may have been dropped on the weight stack. This would have placed an increased load above the 2.9kg on the framework causing it to buckle.
To conclude, the experiment has aided understanding into the structural analysis of trusses. The experiment aided the ability to determine which members would be under compression and which would be placed under tension. The results achieved followed theory, with the frameworks consisting of shorter members under compression holding the highest loads. Some errors where made in the experiment, with the difference in theoretical and measured loads highlighting this. The difference in results underlined the limitations of physical modelling for structural analysis.
