Antidumping is a widespread phenomenon that attracts a great deal of attention and criticism, both from researchers and countries whose industries seek such protection or are targets of others' antidumping actions. It has evolved significantly since its origins, back in the early years of 20 th century, distancing itself more and more, according to some experts, from the problem of dumping and becoming increasingly simply a protectionist tool (Zanardi, 2006). Dumping can be roughly defined as a situation where a firm sells products on an export market for a price lower than a price for the same product on the home market; it is also said to occur when cost of production exceeds the export price of the product (Hoekman, Kostecki, 2001). First country to adopt antidumping law was Canada which in 1904 imposed its formal antidumping measure on the United States origin steel exports that were allegedly delivered at prices below domestic US price. Therefore the duty was imposed to offset the difference between the export price and normal value (Regmy, Skully, 2002). It can be noted thus that underlying motive behind that restriction was the desire to keep the trade fair- argument of AD supporters also nowadays, ironically refuted by its opponents (Bloningen, Prusa, 2003, McGee, 2002).
This review aims at presenting various opinions on antidumping activity within the GATT/WTO framework in general and focusing more on the field of agricultural products. General findings on proliferation of AD legislation amongst WTO member states are also presented, as it has been observed in the literature that "new users" (such as India, Latin America countries or China) have begun to play a significantly larger role in terms of using AD protection (at the same time being targeted by AD actions themselves). However, according to the available data for years 1981-2003 these are still "old users" that are important: the European Union being the leading target of world-wide AD initiations and the USA as the WTO member that has initiated most of AD investigations in the above period (Jones, 2005). Agricultural exports are considered to show high vulnerability to trade protection actions, especially taking into account increasing activity of developing countries, which is also discussed in the literature (Regmy, Skully, 2002). Finally, as there seems to be general agreement concerning the need to reform AD regulation in the WTO, some expert opinions on possible future developments are included in the review as well.
Using AD seems to be most popular amongst trade remedy instruments, such as safeguard and countervailing measures (Trebilcock, Howse, 1999), and this protection mechanism is being applied in spite of many critical opinions concerning its practical and economical justification. Viner (1923) argued that dumping was an issue that called for solutions, in his book "Dumping: A Problem in International Trade" , but in 2006 it was paraphrased by Zanardi - "Antidumping: A Problem in International Trade" or by Prusa (2005)- "Anti-dumping: A Growing Problem in International Trade". It may be considered as a matter for concern by certain experts, and even worse-a growing one, due to the fact that number of countries enacting AD law has reached 98 by the end of 2003 and more countries are still interested in putting this trade instrument into their legal framework (Zanardi, 2006; Prusa, 2005). On the one hand it can be perceived in a positive light since once elitist trade remedy, has become more egalitarian, but on the other hand many authors are convinced that it is thus more likely to cause more damage in the international trade (in terms of spread of accessibility of this hidden protectionism) (Miranda, Torres, Ruiz, 1998). As Gallaway et al. (in Zanardi, 2006) note, antidumping is almost in every case welfare reducing and to illustrate this thesis, they indicate that the removal of all AD and countervailing orders in 1993 in the USA would have resulted in increasing welfare in this country by almost $4 billion. They also find that the actual gain from AD duties for the US producers is not as big as the loss to the consumers. McGee (2002) makes it also clear (taking a rather biased viewpoint) that consumers should be allowed to buy whatever they choose, including cheaper foreign produce and domestic producers should either adjust or turn to other activities. Antidumping is largely criticised for the opportunities that it creates for abuse (Grimwade, 2000). Also Finger (1999) refutes the argument that AD is a tool of ensuring observance of fair play rules, claiming that it is only a means of favouring import-competing industries. As it can be concluded, based on the mentioned stands, it is rather hard to find favourable opinions towards AD, with exception of some countries that are still convinced that antidumping is necessary, e.g. the United States (Lee, Mah, 2003) or the EU, but even they have to take into consideration voices (also from its own entities) calling for reforming the existing rules.
At present antidumping is regulated at international level by The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT 1994) and The Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994. Article VI of GATT authorises WTO members to impose AD duty (on top of existing tariff rates) if an investigation results in determining that imports of a specific product are sold at less than normal value (dumping) and that such imports (causal relationship between the two) cause or threaten to cause material injury to a domestic industry or may lead to material retardation of the establishment of such an industry. The Antidumping Agreement clarifies and expands Article VI. Literature covers various aspects of both texts (e.g. Vermulst, 2005; WTO website). WTO members can also enact domestic antidumping laws, the practice being very popular, which are widely covered by the expert analysis, e.g. in Messerlin, Reed (1995) for the USA and the EU.
GATT antidumping provisions apply to all kinds of economic activity sectors as Jackson (1989) notes, so the both manufactured and agricultural products cases are investigated following the same basic rules. However Hartigan (2000) claims that agricultural imports are likely not to be well addressed by the above international regulations, due to the fact that agricultural produce shows specific features that may make it more difficult to obtain a "fair" outcome of the AD procedure. He argues that such factors as lack of control over timing and volume of output, perishability or substantial price volatility may lead to calculating significantly different (i.e. higher) dumping margins for agricultural products. Blonigen (2003) mentions that other authors point at more features of agricultural production as having possible impact on outcomes of AD investigation (Schmitz et al., 1981; Palmeter, 1989). Practices involved in antidumping procedure that are claimed to cause more problems when dealing with agricultural products, are methodology of determining normal value, dumping margin calculations, defining home industry etc. (Hartigan, 2000; Blonigen, 2003). Especially the US practice of "zeroing" (Jones, 2005; Messerlin, Reed, 1995) used for calculating dumping margin attracted a lot of criticism and was ruled inconsistent with WTO law by the Panel (), therefore the US announced it would discontinue the use of this method ().
Blonigen (2003) observes that AD case filings concerning agricultural products worldwide tend to follow general AD activity, but the percentage of such cases is slightly lower than share of agriculture in trade flows. He also indicates at existing evidence that challenges created by antidumping trade protection affect similarly agricultural and manufactured products. Still, it seems reasonable to look into the question of antidumping investigations in agricultural products, that made up approximately 6% of all antidumping investigations for the period between 1987 and 1997 (mainly high value and processed food products) (Regmy, Skully, 2002). For the same period though investigations concerning agricultural products among "new users" (such as Brazil and Colombia) amounted at 10% of total number of AD investigations. Many authors (Hoekman, Kostecki, 2001; Prusa, 2001; Jones, 2005) underline that antidumping as a trade remedy instrument is still popular and most of all increasingly used by the "new users". According to WTO data () though, actual number of all implemented AD measures between January 2003 and June 2004 was lower (52) than in the same period in 2003 (114). Jones (2005) however explains this fact by the countries' uncertainty about results of ongoing Doha Negotiations and usual wide year to year variations of international activity, therefore it is not clear whether such decreasing trend will continue. Statistics by WTO (Jones, 2005) show that for the period 1981-2003 European Union was the most frequent target of AD complaints, and the USA was the most active user. Blonigen (2003) draws attention to the fact that the two countries rarely target each other in AD cases regarding agricultural products, which may be caused by fear of potential retaliation, since Blonigen and Bown (2003) consider the retaliation threats to be factors that significantly dampen AD petitions in the sectors of manufacture.
The field of antidumping is far from being static as new countries choose to adopt appropriate regulations, and AD measures are being used extensively to ensure different goals, which sceptics describe pejoratively as protectionist, but supporters hail as beneficial towards domestic industries. There appears to be a general agreement that WTO AD regulation needs improvements or even replacing by other more adequate trade instruments and many ways of achieving these objectives are suggested. For instance Matsushitaal. (2003) suggests eliminating such measures in favour of measures developed by the competition law, such as control of predatory pricing. Countries discussing the issue of antidumping during Doha Negotiations also put forward propositions concerning introduction of mandatory lesser duty rate, increased use of price undertakings or establishing more objective guidelines and definitions concerning injury determination process (Jones, 2005). Undoubtedly these are very hard and sensitive issues, since in case of antidumping, whether it concerns agricultural or manufactured goods, someone gains but it is always at the expense of someone else, so the right balance between different interests must be found.
