With the increased demand for quality in everything that we do or produce nowadays we need to have some rules in order to obtain a guaranteed production. Quality procedures and guarantees were therefore required in case of commercial horticulture. Thus, these processes, procedures and criteria can be applied to any horticultural enterprise, no matter its size, and ensure that this enterprise has the ability to provide satisfactory goods.
On the other hand, quality must be pursued concurrently with safety. As a result, we need a management system that provides prevention of injuries and minimization of health damage. Consequently, the implementation of an integrated approach to managing safety and quality in a horticultural enterprise is absolutely necessary. The scope of this research is to explore the potential benefits and pitfalls of linking safety management with quality management in a tomato nursery.
Customers want an assurance that the product that they buy truly meets some quality standards. Quality management systems (QMS) are set up in order to control and monitor all stages of the production process. These systems provide proof to the potential customer that products have the guaranteed quality. Without doubt, in these days of competitive world markets no longer horticultural growers can rely on their reputation alone. QMS give guidance to growers in order to improve the overall performance of the horticultural enterprise (Tricker, 2001).
Very often production and safety are contradictory. Production pressures, excessively demanding tasks, long work hours contribute to accidents. Safety management systems (SMS) provide methods for risk reduction and control. As health and safety at work is a mandatory requirement of EU legislation for the agriculture sector, enterprises should be aware of the implications of the statutory national European and international legal requirements for health and safety and implement safety management systems at workplace (Mol, 2003).
There are difficulties in integrating SMS and QMS in horticultural industry, because, as in many businesses, safety management is peripheral to core management. Safety at workplace in many cases is imposed by external factors, such as national legal framework. Employers also face pressures by workers to provide a safe place of employment. However, in reality, safety often conflicts with production. Thus, horticultural industry requires an integrated approach of QMS and SMS. This means that the safety system must be aligned with the quality system in order both optimal safety and quality outcomes to be achieved (Mol, 2003).
An integrated QMS and SMS application in the workplace primarily leads to desirable behavioral change of workers, which in turn generates positive outcomes for both the enterprise and its employees. The behavioral change provides high level competencies to workers to perform their duties with increased efficiency, safety and quality. The enterprise has to provide training so that workers develop their ability to evaluate and understand an accident risk and how it is influenced by their behavior. By QMS aspect, the optimization of human resources is a very important asset that provides a competitive advantage for the enterprise. By SMS perspective behavioral change is an interesting risk management technique because the traditional approach of a SMS is that employees are the primary source of accident in the workplace. This traditional safety approach acknowledges that error and unsafe acts arise mostly from behavioral processes such as forgetfulness, inattention, poor motivation, negligence and carelessness. According to an integrated approach of QMS and SMS systems, human resources need to be maintained at optimal performance so that the probability of an accident to be reduced and the overall performance of the enterprise to be maximized (Dale, et al. 1997 and Mol, 2003).
A modern SMS approach accepts that the great majority of actual causes of injuries are an interaction between the worker and the facility. A work environment is a combination of human factors (e.g. competency of workers, overall performance) and physical factors (e.g. heat, hygiene, vibration, noise, humidity, pollution, light, cleanliness and air flow). Since the scope of a safety system is to moderate these risks, the safety manager has to control and manage both human and physical factors. If human factors and physical factors are not managed properly, they can result to health and safety risks. Additionally, the facilitation of employee working environment raises the level of competence and safety consciousness of workers. Moreover, the physical factors must further be taken into consideration by the grower, because they have the potential to influence motivation and satisfaction of workers, enhancing the performance of the enterprise. Hence, the control of human and physical factors can be adopted as an integrated common process of SMS and QMS, because it leads to risk management at workplace and improves the overall performance of workers (Mol, 2003 and Tricker, 2001).
Noise and vibration is worldwide a major health hazard at workplace. A packing machine in a tomato nursery can probably lead workers to hearing damage because of the long-term exposure to high levels of noise. It is important to manage these risks using technologies with lower noise level. From quality point of view the installation of technology with lower noise level provides better work environment to employees, enhancing their performance, though it can be cost demanding (Mol, 2003).
Environmental and air conditions can cause hazards to workers in a tomato nursery. Solar radiation is an obvious hazard in a tomato nursery and can lead to overheating and sunburn, reducing worker comfort and performance. High humidity makes working conditions more difficult. Slippery surfaces due to high moisture or leakage from irrigation systems are possible to occur. High winds are also hazardous because they can destabilize nursery 's structure causing them to collapse. Hazardous fumes, chemicals and dust are also very common phenomena in a tomato nursery and have undesirable effects on employees' health. Extreme temperatures in a greenhouse affect worker comfort, safety and the ability to maintain vigilance. Fatigued employees are not as productive and safe as are alert employees. Air pollution, heating and humidity in a nursery need to be controlled with the appropriate ventilation system. Rest breaks and rotation of workers (so that they undertake a variety of tasks, such as lifting, sorting, sitting and standing), can be parts of a safety system. The safety manager also must be aware of the ability of each person to handle heat stress especially if there are new or temporary workers at workplace. From quality management point of view, exhaustion of workers due to bad physical conditions in the nursery can lead to low productivity of labor (Mol, 2003).
All chemicals present possible hazards and therefore they are under very strict safety regulations. Agrochemicals can cause irritation symptoms of eyes, nose and throat. Some workers may also have some particular reactions such as asthma and skin reactions. Furthermore, workers need to be aware of basic rules of chemical safety when spray or use chemicals. The manufacturers' labels must be maintained on all chemical containers and in the event a label becomes damaged, removed, or unreadable, the container should be relabeled immediately, so that workers can read them before use (Brown et al. 2005).
Technology has a lead-time before it begins to degrade and before this deterioration causes an unacceptable hazard. For instance, handling equipment, cladding materials, vehicles (small tractors), packing equipment, sorting equipment are necessary technology in a tomato nursery. However, as technology degrades the probability of an incident rises. Safety management identifies hazards and risks of suboptimal old equipment in order to prevent the probability of an accident. A QMS has to take a cost-benefit decision of operating old equipment. Assuming that the technology remains operational though it is less efficient, it may be more effective to continue to operate the old technology than replacing it with new one. This is conflict point between QMS and SMS. Nevertheless, a QMS has to consider that there are hidden costs when old equipment is used. For instance, suboptimal equipment results to suboptimal productivity, costly maintenance, damage to technology (e.g. withdrawal from service for unplanned maintenance to rectify its deteriorated condition), higher labor demands, less safety (expenses from injury to an employee) and losses of productive hours (Mol, 2003).
New technology is safer than old technology, provided that employees are familiar with the technological change. Pre-operational training and practice to new equipment are basic demands of a joint quality and safety management system. Risk assessment continues until the employees become skilled with the new equipment as they were with the old equipment (Mol, 2003).
Quality and risk assessment are the most important processes in managing quality and safety at workplace. Quality and risk assessment should be undertaken regularly and the enterprise should keep records of the assessment. It should be undertaken whenever new work practices are introduced, when new technology is installed and when the work environment is significantly modified. The auditors conduct a standard operating procedure for each work practice in the enterprise and look at each procedural step of work practice, identifying areas of risk. Auditing also covers document control, inspection of hazards (substances, condition of equipment, workplace design) and workers' safety training. When safety risks are identified, auditing results should be used to develop remedies and should be communicated to employees and visitors (Mol, 2003 and Tricker, 2001).
An important part of the quality and safety process is the communication of potential risks to visitors. Visitors include students on work experience programs, family members of workers, children who are in the workplace for educational reasons, clients and customers. Having people in nursery who have limited knowledge of the risks and usually lack any kind of safety training, the probability of an accident is increased. In this case, restriction of visitors from high-risk areas must be imposed. During the busiest times of years, such as spring and summer, it may be needed to impose a tight regulation of arrivals and departures of visitors, according a strict timetable. Furthermore, they should be required to sign-in before their entry into the nursery and be supervised by nursery 's staff until departure. Finally, visitors must be provided with safety instructions during their visit, because it lifts the level of safety consciousness. If visitors are at the nursery for a number of weeks or months, i.e. work experience students, they must be treated like employees and put under safety training. If visitors are not treated properly, they can have serious impacts on production causing upset and annoyance (Mol, 2003).
The application of SMS in horticultural industry results to cost savings and better overall performance of the enterprise. Safety management maintains a culture that fosters a "no fault" environment and encourages staff to have safety consciousness. Workers are empowered and encouraged to have full responsibility of their work, seek improvements, report problems and recommend actions that solve them. Safety assessment results will be used as feedback to implement improvement to the quality management system. Control of processes, skills, hazards and equipment are now clearly and more closely specified, understood and documented. Safety training also enhances personnel 's understanding of missions and functions of work processes, knowledge and proper use of the procedures. The prevention of injuries at workplace results to minimization of lost work days and insurance costs for employees' injury. In addition to the costs of personnel injuries, far greater costs may be caused from damage to property or equipment, and lost production. Poor safety also, causes a negative impact on workers' psychology, leading eventually to resignations and departures from the enterprise. On the other hand, a safe, clean, health and comfort environment can raise personnel 's motivation and satisfaction, increasing the productivity of labor (Mol, 2003 and Tricker, 2001).
Production pressures often lead to work out of hours and very demanding work schedules. Work cannot be delayed when crops must be planted and harvested. Nursery workers need to work overtime during the busiest times of the year. In this case safety system may be a constraint. Safety management requires high competent workers to operate demanding technology. In practice, it is not always possible to obtain high skilled staff, because high quality human resources are restricted (Mol, 2003).
A SMS is undoubtedly cost demanding. For instance, the safety training of workers and the adoption of safer technology require extra costs for the enterprise. In some cases also, although old technology remains operational, it must be replaced for safety reasons. Moreover, if we want to modify the physical environment in order to provide health and comfort to workers, we need to do capital investments (Mol, 2003).
An enterprise has to comply with national legal obligations and concurrently has to attain quality production. For this reason, it needs to take a holistic approach of quality that integrates product quality through the maintenance of safety at workplace. Human resources, technology and work environment are essential elements of a safety management system. The management of these factors results to improvements in safety, performance and quality of the enterprise.
