In 1911 Rutherford announced his model of the atom. He said that the nucleus contents the positive charges and is posited in the middle of the atom. Almost the whole weight of the atom is concentrated in this point. The electrons who are charged negatively circle about the nucleus on orbits. This is why the model is also called the planetary model of the atom. However, there was one big problem with this model which could n't be explained. Rutherford 's model predicted that the electrons on circular or elliptical orbits circle about the nucleus and are therefore radial accelerated. However the classical Newtonians mechanic says that accelerating charges emit electromagnetic rays and therefore lose energy. As a result of this the electrons would circle towards the nucleus. This is not true. Many experiments proved that most atoms are stable. The model also failed to explain the spectral lines that were observed on experiments. These failures of Rutherford 's atom model made Niels Bohr to think of a new idea of the structure of the atom. He picked up the main ideas from Rutherford 's atom model and tried to improve it. With his postulates he tried to explain his observation on the hydrogen atom. He also attempted to explain the origin of the spectral lines and the stability of the atom which the old atom model failed to explain. He tried this by combining the old way of thinking - classical mechanics - with a new area in physics which stared at this time - quantum physics.
Bohr established his idea based on his observations on the hydrogen atom in postulates which are as follows.
The first postulate states that electrons move on stable circular orbits around the nucleus without emitting photons. It is said that the electron is in its stationary state.
The second postulate describes the motion of the electron which is mainly build on Newton 's Law. However, the electron 's angular momentum L is quantized in units of Planck 's constant h divided by 2  .
When an electron jumps from one state into another the energy   E is released as a single photon of the frequency    =   E/h.
Every orbit corresponds to a fixed amount of energy. If an electron changes its orbit it emits, or absorbs a photon equal to the energy difference of the orbits. For emission or absorption the frequency of the radiation is given by    = (Ei-Ef)/h.
Bohr 's first postulate says that the electrons of the atom move on stable orbits about the nucleus. He picked up the idea from Rutherford 's atom model which says that there is a tiny nucleus in the middle compared to the electron gas circle about it. Since Rutherford 's Model could n't describe the stability of the electrons in their circular orbits Bohr states that the electrons must move on stable orbits. To be able to make such a statement Bohr assumed that the nucleus is so massive compared to the electron that it remains stationary. This assumption is very arbitrary. The perfect circular orbits of a mini solar system arose from the idea of the classical way of thinking. Since Rutherford 's atom model failed to explain why the electrons do n't circle towards the nucleus Bohr made something up to satisfy his observations. The idea of orbits of different energy levels is part of the quantum theory. With these ideas he combined classical physics with quantum theory. Since Bohr could n't explain all his observations with classical equations and laws he needed another theory to combine it with. Since the atom seemed to behave in a quantum mechanical way in different situations Bohr just fixed the two physics area together and hoped they would prove his observations. This looks like he tried to find an alternative to establish his ideas.
The first postulate also states that electrons circle the nucleus on stable circular orbits which correspond to a fixed amount of energy. There are no stadiums between the orbits, because they would require a fractional amount of energy. He labelled the first orbit with the smallest radius about the nucleus with n = 1, the second biggest radius with n = 2 and so on. The nth orbit is called Bohr 's quantum number. Later physicist proved this assumption to be wrong when making experiment at the double column. Bohr assumed when shooting electrons through two slits they would hit the screen behind the two slits exactly at two stripes. So he could prove that the electron move on defined orbits. However when doing this experiment it was observed that the electrons hit the screen arbitrarily. Physicists were not able to predict where the electrons would hit the screen. The assumption could be made, that we are not able to say where the electron lingers at any time in the atom. This also concludes that electrons do n't move on circular orbits about the nucleus since the hits on the screen were unpredictable and did n't show a clear pattern.
The second postulate describes the motion of the electron which is mainly described by Newton 's Law. However this alone did n't describe the observations of the hydrogen atom 's behaviours. This is why Bohr combined classical mechanics and quantum physics again in this postulate. He said that the magnitude of the electrons' angular momentum L is quantized in units of Planck 's constant. Bohr sates his quantization condition in this equation. L = mvr = nh/2  . (L = orbital angular momentum, m = mass of electron, v = velocity of electron, r = radius of the orbit, h = Planck 's constant, n = Bohr 's quantum number) The angular momentum or Bohr 's quantum number can have any positive integer values n = 1, 2, 3.... Rutherford 's model assumed that the electron is able to have any value of angular momentum. Bohr 's contradicts this with the assumption that the angular momentum of the orbiting electron about the nucleus stays constant and the magnitude of L takes only certain definite values. This is because each value of n corresponds to a defined nth Bohr orbit. This adoption also states that the atom has certain circular orbit radii which have certain values of velocity. With the equation above Bohr combines a classical equation L = mvr with a quantum equation L = nh/2  . In his Correspondence Principle Bohr states that in the limiting case of large quantum numbers, the results obtained from quantum theory must agree with those obtained from classical theory. This is only for large values of n. If n is small then the classical frequency is smaller than the quantum mechanical frequency. We can see in this statement that there is a rub in it. The equation of the motion of the electron is therefore just accurate for certain values for n. For small values of n we have a great uncertainty that our calculated value is correct, because the Correspondence Principle will not work on those. Later physicist had to replace the hybrid theory with a new quantum mechanics equation for motion. Experiments proved that electrons behave as particle as well as waves. The new wave equation for the motion of an electron in an atom was discovered by Schr  dinger.
The third postulate says that when an electron makes a transition between its orbits it absorbs or emits a certain amount of energy. This energy is quantized and called photons. Bohr 's electrons have the ability to jump from one orbit, or state, to another one. An electron is able to jump from a lower state to a higher state when absorbing light. When jumping back to its original state, which the electron prefers, it releases the same amount of energy. In both cases the energy E = h   (E = Energy, h = Planck quantum,    = frequency) is used. This is called the emission or absorption transition. When the particles do these jumps Bohr also stated that the electrons radiate x-rays. Bohr explained the different energy levels as flight of steps where the top steps are smaller in depth than the bottom ones. Each depth of a stair from the top is proportional to 1/n  , where n is the number of the step from the bottom. The staircase model explains better why there is no in between energy level state. The atom would n't be stable if an electron stops in the middle of two steps. If an electron falls back from its excited state to its ground state it emits a photon of light. Dependent on its frequency the light has a different colour to our eye. The number of lines in the spectrum indicates how many states, or steps there are in an atom and how deep each tread is. The Bohr Model failed to explain the splitting of spectral lines that ought to be single into closely spaced multiples. If an electron circles towards the nucleus, the closer it gets the larger the acceleration and the higher the frequency because the amplitude of the wave would be continually increasing. But atoms are stable. They do not behave this way when observed. They emit discrete frequencies (spectral lines) instead of a continuum of frequencies. This was another flaw in Bohr 's atom model.
The fourth postulate describes the electron jumps which were talked about in the third postulate more detailed. It springs from the assumption that every orbit corresponds to a fixed energy. If an electron changes its orbit it emits or absorbs a photon equal to the energy difference of the orbits. Each orbit contains the energy E = h  . For emission or absorption this equation for the frequency is given    = (Ei-Ef)/h which is called the Planck- Einstein formula. In this equation Ei is the initial state of the electron in its orbit and Ef the final state to which it is transmitted. If an electron jumps from a lower orbit into a higher state then Ei would be the ground state and Ef would be the excited state and the Energy would be absorbed. If an electron jumps from the higher state into its ground state Energy would be emitted.
The spectral lines which the hydrogen atom emits could be seen and evaluated perfectly with Bohr 's atom model. Balmer discovered the formula for the frequency of spectral lines. Bohr 's theory fitted perfectly in Balmer 's formula, which calculates the frequencies for the spectral lines of the hydrogen atom. Balmer 's formula is the following equation    = Ry(1/n  -1/m  ) (   = frequency, Ry = Rydberg constant, n and m are integers 1, 2, 3... with m n, which show the energy levels). The wavelength can be calculated in the following way    = hc/Ei-Ef (   = wavelength, h = Planck 's constant, c = speed of light, Ei = initial energy, Ef = final energy). The different wavelengths resulting from this equation are called spectral lines and can be drawn in an energy-level diagram. The Balmer Series in the energy-level diagram shows jumps of the electron between the quantized energy levels n = 6 and n = 2. Since Ei and Ef can only have certain values, the wavelength can also only have certain values. Bohr 's theory predicted the spectral lines of the hydrogen atom correctly and agreed with Balmer 's Series. The colour of the photons which the hydrogen atom emitted could be observed as purple (barely seeable), purple, blue, red. Bohr assumed that this theory would fit into each and every atom. However, the calculations failed with any other atoms, also atoms which are as simple as the hydrogen atom. Normally an electron stays is its ground state closest to the nucleus. At this low energy level it does not emit any energy. To excite the electron to jump to a higher orbit, it has to be heated or an electric current has to be passed through. The electron will be kicked into a higher orbit, then back to its ground state. On its way back it emits a quantum of light of a fixed frequency. After Bohr 's postulates this energy is radiated as a single photon of frequency    =   E/h. When modifying the equation a little bit it predicts the spectrum of for example helium and lithium. It tells the jumps from the electron closest to the nucleus. For example in an iron atom Bohr 's theory fails. The electrons not only interact with the nucleus, but also with the other electrons. The orbits are more complicated. However the innermost electrons behaviour is similar to the hydrogen behaviour Bohr predicted.
In the 20th century another step was taken to improve the atom model and to make it as close to reality as possible. Without Bohr this step to quantum mechanics would n't have been possible. He was the first who dared to step closer to the new, not yet fully explored, world of quantum physics. Like Bohr tried to improve Rutherford 's model like every scientist tries to make a theory better and want to understand the way of nature. Not until everything explored and everything is proven about a million times and calculations fit observation will a scientist be satisfied. Bohr 's atom model is a transition from the classical thinking to the quantum mechanics way of thinking. Orbits were now banded completely and it was accepted that there is only a probability were the electron lingers. With lots of experiment with the double columns scientists proved that electrons do n't behave as particles but as waves. Bohr 's model of the atom stimulated later physicist to completely turn away from the classical mechanics and to accept the new area of Physics quantum mechanics and tried to improve the atom model. The Bohr model has been a great success because of its flaws, because this stimulated physicists to go further into a new way of seeing things. Also, not every thought of Bohr 's atom model was a failure. There were some things which later physicist proved right and put them into a new model of the atom. For example his equation for the radius could be used to estimate the size of the atom. Although Bohr atom model failed to explain the spectral lines for all but one atom, it still described those of the hydrogen atom perfectly. This was a good start in explaining the spectral lines in very simple atoms. Scientists will be soon able to have a perfect atom model close to reality thanks to Bohr 's first step taken into quantum mechanics.
