Freezing is one of the methods used for food preservations. During freezing food is solidified or preserved through chilling and storing at temperatures below ambient temperature. Preservation of food by freezing is an excellent method of ensuring the long term retention of original characteristics of a wide variety of highly perishable food products.
Quality retention is achieved both by effect of cold temperature which slows down biochemical reactions and inhibit microbial activities, secondly lowering of water activity as most of free water is converted to ice at the temperature -18 0C or below.
Freezing does not completely destroy bacteria, molds, and yeasts but does retard their growth. Once food is thawed, micro organisms may continue to grow. Natural enzymes in vegetables and fruits cause flavor, colour, texture, and nutritive value changes. Freezing slows enzyme activity but does not stop it. Frozen vegetables and fruits will become tough and lose flavour during storage unless enzyme activity is stopped by blanching before freezing. Vegetables loose quality rapidly after harvesting.
In order to achieve the preservation effect a high portion of the freezable water of water is converted to ice, and kept at this state during subsequent storage to minimize physical, biochemical and microbial changes which could otherwise lead to deterioration of the product. In industrial and commercial practice two temperature ranges for storage and retail sale are used, namely frozen foods and deep frozen foods. Frozen foods is used for a limited group of food products which are maintain at temperature -10 0C or colder and deep frozen foods at temperature range of -18 0C or colder with a minimum fluctuations in temperature range ().
In this practical, potatoes, sprouts, apples, mushrooms, carrots and tomatoes were used to study freezing processing. Fruits and vegetables were prepared by blanching to inactivate enzymes and partially cooked and remove air and vegetative organisms. During blanching they were treated at different time interval to study blanching effects. Also sulphiting was done for samples which were not blanched in order to study/ control browning effect. + Indicates positive test for browning, where by samples were sliced and chopped into halves. Firstly hydrogen peroxide was applied followed by Guiacol (phenolic compound).
When few drops of hydrogen peroxide was applied it did effervesce which indicated the presence of catalase enzymes, and when few drops of guiacol was added formed browning due to presence of free radicals formed by catalase enzymes.
From the table above carrots, potatoes and sprouts which were not blanched undergone browning rapidly as compared to others samples which were blanched. Also when blanching was done by use hard water, browning occurred in short time as compared to soft water. Carrots undergo browning when were left on air for some period of time especially at the sides of the sliced pieces. However, catalase enzyme produced in fruits and vegetables is variable depending on the type of variety of the product, size, growing conditions and maturity stage of the product.
In blast freezers air is recirculated over food at between -30 0C and -40 0C at a velocity of 1.5-6m/s. The higher the air velocity reduces the thickness of boundary films surrounding the food and increases the surface heat transfer coefficient. Blast freezer is relatively economical and highly flexible in that food of different shapes and sizes can be frozen. However moisture from the food is transferred to the air and builds up as ice on the refrigeration coils.
Plate freezers consist of vertical or horizontal stack of hollow plates of which refrigerant is pumped at -40 0C. They may be batch or continuous in operation. When foods are placed on the plates, slight pressure is applied by moving the plates together. This improves the contact between the food and surface of the plates and consequently increases the rate of heat transfer. If packed foods are frozen by plate freezers, the pressure prevents the lager surfaces of the plate from bulging.
From the tables above for plate and blast freezers, it was identified that, despite the method of freezing used, freezing depends on the type of the food product i.e. the higher the moisture content the longer it will take to freeze the products. However plate freezing it is time consuming because you need loading and off loading of food products on the plates. In blast freezing it has advantage it can be used to freeze on any time of food products i.e. it is flexible.
Results.
Water was evaporated from surface of tomatoes by use of vacuum. tomatoes were used in vacuum freezer because they have high water content. Therefore, it was easy to visualize water bubbled out as vacuum applied. Vacuum freezing is often used as a preliminary step for freezing drying.
In vacuum freezer, food product is put at ambient temperature inside the freezer but the pressure is lowered below atmospheric pressure. If water vapor pressure of a food is held below atmospheric pressure and the water is frozen, when the food is heated the solid ice sublimes directly to the vapor without melting. Water vapor is continuously removed from the food by keeping the pressure in the freezer below the vapor pressure of the surface of the ice, removing vapor with a vacuum pump and condensing it on the refrigeration coils.
In vacuum freezer, tomatoes were sliced into halves and put in the freezer at ambient temperature. Pressure was reduced and causes tomatoes to boil at ambient temperature. The energy which was provided by the tomatoes causes evaporation of water and freezing. Vacuum freezing it is a quick method and restoring quality attributes of the food product.
Liquid nitrogen was used to freeze potatoes, tomatoes, sprouts, apple, carrots and mushroom at fixed time of 1 minute. During freezing, heat lost by the food product is the heat gained by the liquid nitrogen which causes it to boil. Also the higher the moisture content of the food product, the longer the time taken for freezing as shown on the table above. Tomato has higher moisture content as compare to apple and potato with a higher temperature as compared to apple and potato respectively.
However, it was identified the food products with higher moisture content e.g. tomatoes takes longer to completely freeze as compared to food products with low moisture content e.g. sprouts. Also with liquid nitrogen there was cracks on the surface of the food products due to sudden change heat change.
Cryogenic are freezers which are characterized by change of state of a refrigerant as heat is absorbed from the freezing food. Heat from the food provides the latent heat of vaporization or cryogenic of sublimation. Common refrigerants used are liquid nitrogen and solid/liquid carbon dioxide. There are several advantages of using liquid nitrogen as a refrigerant, which are;.
However, the main disadvantage is relatively high cost of refrigerant (Fellows, P.J 2000).
Potatoes, sprouts, apples, mushrooms, carrots and tomatoes were cleaned, peeled and/ or chopped into halves as appropriate. Also they were blanched (except tomatoes) so as to destroy destructive enzymes. Most fruits and vegetables require blanching, although those susceptible to enzymatic browning benefit from inactivation of polyphenoloxidase. Indicator enzymes to establish blanching efficacy include peroxidase, catalase and lipoxygenase. However the maturity stage of the commodity can influence the efficacy of the blanching. Also blanching serves other function in addition to enzyme inactivation, the process is energy intensive and may cause undesirable changes such as loss of protein and volatile compounds.
Sodium metabisulphite of 0.1% and 0.5% was used at 5minutes for pretreatment of potatoes, sprouts, apples, mushrooms, carrots and tomatoes. This was done so as to prevent texture damage during freezing- thawing and prevent enzymatic browning by excluding oxygen (Erickson and Hung, 1997).
Although sodium metabisulphite was used and applied to sliced and chopped fruits and vegetables they undergo browning on additional of guiacol. This is because sodium metabisulphite can prevent enzymatic browning depending on the concentration used with respect to the type of food product applied on. During the experiment, only few drops of sodium metabisulphite was used of (0.1% & 0.5%) throughout for all the food products.
During freezing process different parts of the product passes through various stages at different times. There are three stages of temperature change;.
Prefreezing stage - is the period which elapses between the time at which a product with a warm temperature is subjected to freezing process and the time at which the crystallization of water starts.
Freezing stage - is the period during which the temperature at the considered location is almost constant because the heat which is being abstracted is causing the majority of water to change phase to ice.
Reduction or storage temperature - is the period during which the temperature is reduced from the temperature at which most of freezable water has been converted to ice to the intended final temperature.
Sodium metabisulphite was used to treat potatoes, sprouts, apples, mushrooms, carrots and tomatoes. Sodium metabisulphite or calcium oxide is added to blancher water to protect chlorophyll and to retain color of the green vegetables, although increase in pH may increase losses of ascorbic acid. When food are correctly blanched mostly do n't have significantly changes to flavor, but under blanching can lead to off flavor during storage of frozen foods.
Freezing time is the time elapsed from the start of the freezing stage until the final temperature is reached. There are several factors which affect freezing rates and times which are;.
Planck 's equation is used to estimate the freezing time of foods: , where;.
Freezing time for the blast freezer:
Freezing time for liquid nitrogen:
To maintain the quality of frozen foods it 's to maintain its temperature until its final use. Therefore, it is important to select the correct temperature for the expected period of storage and during this storage period the following hazards to quality must be avoided.
Increase in temperature (both during storage and process of loading and unloading).
Physical damage to product or packaging during the course of storage of handling.
A low relative humidity in the cold store (if product is n't packed).
Contamination of the product by foreign bodies, this can be avoided by.
An air tight and mechanically resistant packaging.
Ensuring the design of the cold store is appropriate to its duty.
To prevent small fluctuations in temperature is difficult. However, storage room should be kept in good conditions to minimize the amount of weight loss by drying and in packaging desiccation.
Transport of frozen foods from the cold store of the producer to retailer or consumer should be done in thermally insulated vehicles or containers which are equipped for maintaining sufficient cold air temperature in the storage space of the equipment. Since frozen foods generated no heat during storage and transport, it is crucial to combat heat entering from outside of the vehicle or container. Frozen foods can be carried at higher temperatures particularly if duration of transport is short, but the maximum temperature should never exceed - 10 0C (Malesherbe, B, 1986).
During freezing ice crystals are formed. These ice crystals have a lower water vapour pressure than regions within the cell, and water moves from the cell to the growing crystals. Cells becomes dehydrated and permanently damaged by the increase solute concentration collapsed and deform structure. On thawing cells do n't regain their original shape and turgidity. Food is softened and cellular materials leaks out from ruptured cells i.e. drip loss (Fellows, P.J 2000).
Drip loss in frozen foods depends on the intrinsic factors to the food product itself and freezing and thawing conditions. Thawing drip loss is usually unattractive, soluble nutrients are lost. Freezing is effectively dehydration process in which water is removed from its original location and collected in the form of ice crystals. During thawing, water may or may not be absorbed into its original location. Factors that determines thawing drip loss include size and location of the ice crystal with respect to tissue structure, rate of thawing, rate and extent if water reabsorption, physiological/ biochemical status of tissues prior to freezing and intrinsic water binding strength in the tissue prior to freezing.
Recrystallisation in frozen foods occurs when small crystals with higher specific energy compared to large crystals, lose moisture and eventually disappear leading to formation of large crystals. Temperature fluctuations greatly accelerate rate of crystallization. During re-cooling moisture from this crystals will diffuse towards the remaining large crystals rather than forming new crystals. This effect affects texture of the food products. Food products with low freezing point are more sensitive to recrystallization (Erickson and Hung, 1997).
Chilling is a process where by temperature of a food is reduced to between -1 and 8 0C used to reduce the rate of biochemical and microbiological changes. Chilling reduces growth of thermophilic and many mesophilic microorganisms. Main concern microorganisms with chilled foods are number of pathogens that can grow on storage temperatures. It is essential good manufacturing practices are enforced during production and packaging of chilled foods. However, selection of sound raw materials for processing of chilled food is important so as to have sound raw materials i.e. of good quality, few vegetative/ spoilage microorganisms.
The shelf life of chilled processed food products is determined by;.
The main effect of freezing on food quality is the damage caused to cell by ice crystal growth. Freezing causes negligible changes to tissues, flavour and nutritional components. As there are several methods of freezing techniques which can be applied to food products but they do differ on energy consumption, desirable and undesirable effects they do bring about in food products.
Example vacuum freezing is often used as a preliminary step for freezing drying, plate freezing is mostly applicable to food products which can be placed in plates during freezing although it is time consuming during loading and offloading. Blast freezing are flexible i.e. can be used to freeze any time of food products but moisture from the food is transferred to the air and builds up as ice on the refrigeration coils, on which with time it needs to be removed by defrosting of which it can be un economical and wastage of time in large scale industries. Liquid nitrogen is expensive and mostly reserved for expensive products and the products that can be frozen in less than 1 minute. As the size of foods increase, conduction within the food becomes the limiting resistance.
