This practical investigates the properties of several transition metal complexes. The complexes are first synthesized, and then characterized by obtaining Infrared spectra, magnetic susceptibility data, melting points and physical observations.
Ethanol and 2-propanol are flammable. Diethyl ether in addition, forms a heavy vapour that is capable of covering large areas posing an extreme risk of fire and/or explosion. Under certain conditions, ethers can form highly unstable peroxides. For these reasons, the entire experiment will be free from sources of ignition. Due to the volatile nature of some of the compounds used, all chemical handling will be carried out in a fume cupboard.
Nick(II) nitrate hexahydrate, Nickel(II) chloride hexahydrate, cobalt (II) chloride hexahydrate, sodium thiocyanate and triphenylphosphine are all toxic and so care must be taken when handling these substances. In addition, protective glasses and vinyl gloves will be worn at all times. Side reactions can produce unknown compounds, ie., rearrangement of thiocynate to cyanide and so all products must be considered 'unknown' and therefore highly toxic.
Cobalt (II) chloride hexahydrate (1.213g) was dissolved in ethanol (140mL) in a 250mL 2-necked, round bottle flask to form a purple-blue solution. Triphenylphosphine (4.072g) was added, and the mixture stirred magnetically (3 minutes) on an oil bath (set to 35  C). Always with a slow continuous flow of nitrogen into the flask. This was necessary to exclude oxygen which can oxidize the sensitive compounds produced. With time, a suspension formed which was a light soft shade of blue which was more opaque than the mother solution. Added dropwise was a clear ethanolic (10mL) solution of sodium borohydride (0.186g). The temperature was maintained steadily between 30 and 40  C. After addition, the colour reintensified dark (greenish petrol) blue. After 10 minutes of continued warming, the solution was so intensely dark green is was nearly opaque. After 20 minutes, a heavy green-brown precipitate suspension formed which settled at the bottom of the flask.
The product of fine olive-brown crystals was filtered under reduced pressure and washed with three aliquots of ethanol (30mL), followed by two of water (20mL) and finally again with two of ethanol (20mL). The product was then dried under vacuum in a desiccator for 1hour.
The product when dry was a very powdery solid. It was dark(ish) olive green in colour and matt in appearance.
Nickel (II) chloride hexahydrate (1.2010g) was dissolved in ethanol (45mL) with triphenylphosphine (2.7988g of white flakes) in a 100mL round bottomed flask. The cobalt compound did not dissolve completely upon initial mixing and formed a vivid lime green solution. The solution was set to reflux on an oil bath to ca. 100  C (bp. ethanol, 78  C) for 30minutes. After 10 minutes of boiling, the colour was very dark green and very fine dark green crystals where apparent, stuck to the glass where the solution was boiling. Subsequently 30mL of solvent was distilled off (at 80  C with the oil bath set to 94  C) and discarded. The oil bath contained very dark dirty oil which obscured much observation.
Upon standing, the mixture settled into a dark olive green solution with intensely green / black precipitate at the bottom. With further standing the solution clarified to a very transparent olive green solution as more precipitate settled. This solution was filtered using a sintered glass disc under reduced pressure and dried on the disc to reveal an effectively black, microcrystalline solid of very fine particulates which glimmered as light caught it.
The product when dry was a microcrystalline solid which glimmered in the light. It was dark olive green / nearly black in colour.
Part one:
Nickel (II) nitrate hexahydrate (1.3987g) was dissolved in 95% ethanol (16mL) with no need to heat with swirling to form a lime green solution. To this solution sodium thiocyanate (0.8005g) was added and then refluxed for 20 minutes at 94  C. After the 20 minutes not all thiocyanate had dissolved but the solution had turned a blue(ish) green. The reaction vessel was cooled in an ice bath for 15 minutes giving time for sodium nitrate to crystallise out. The blue(ish) green solution was filtered under vacuum leaving an off-white crystal filtrate (coloured green / blue with residual nickel solution).
Part two:
Triphenylphosphine (2.825g) was dissolved in propan-2-ol (25mL) in a 100mL flask and heated under reflux at (93  C) to give a clear solution. The blue(ish) green solution from part one was mildly reheated, even still though evaporation did occur and where it did, a intensely (off) yellow residue formed on the sides of the vessel. This solution was trickled down the reflux apparatus into the clear propanolic triphenylphospine, as one dripped into the other, an intensely deep red (brown) solution instantly formed. Once all nickel thiocyanate had been added and the mixture was allowed to reflux for some time, a deep red / brown dark orange suspension formed. Upon standing the red suspension settled leaving a clear liquid. This was filtered under reduced pressure. When dry, the product was very powdery, having the consistency of eye makeup.
The product was a cochineal powder, red / orange with pink over tones and a slight sparkle was apparent when light caught its surface. Very much resembling eye makeup in appearance (and description: no pun intended). Even though it was entirely dry, it did not look so; it appeared to have lubricative properties as a stirring rod was pushed through it. done.
The measurements for the Cobalt(I) complex suggest the species is paramagnetic. Cobalt (I) has the valence configuration of 4s 13d 7, which if the coordination geometry of the complex was square planar, would give rise to no unpaired electron (with a d 8 config).
See d 8 square planar energy level figure below. If however, the geometry was tetrahedral there would be two unpaired electrons. The result of calculation suggests the number of unpaired electrons is definitely greater than none, and so we can say that the coordination geometry is definitely not square planar. Five sounds very unlikely. My thought on the matter is that due to operative and instrumental error, the readings are significantly higher than the actual value.
The paramagnetic nature observed for the d 8 Dichloro bis-triphenylphosphine Nickel (II) complex can be rationalised by considering that complexes of tetrahedral geometry, owing to the degeneracy of the t 2 orbitals, have two unpaired electrons (this is also true once Jahn-Teller distortion is considered). Experimental data suggests two unpaired electrons, which agrees with a tetrahedral geometry (see the figure below). The magnetic dipole (3.1) is strikingly close to the literary value taken from Venanzi, 1958 (3.07).
The magnetic susceptibility data suggests the Dithiocyanato bis-triphenylphosphine complex has no unpaired electrons. I believe it is reasonable to round this value down taking into account experimental errors. Meaning this complex has no unpaired electrons. Thus, this complex is square planar. It 's diamagnetic nature is a corollary of it 's d 8 configuration (see figure). Through application of the Ligand Field Theory, it can be predicted that d 8 square planar complexes are diamagnetic due electron pairing in the low energy orbitals, with no unpaired electrons being promoted to the b 1g orbital (due to the b 1g 's enormous destabilisation).
This is supported by the work of Venanzi, 1958 which gives the complex geometry of Dithiocyanato bis-triphenylphosphine as trans-square planar, and the geometry of Dichloro bis-triphenylphosphine as tetrahedral.
Taken from Venanzi, 1958. Page 720.
Discussion of the factors which determine whether a d 8 complex of a first row transition element will adopt a tetrahedral or square planar geometry.
There are two main factors which determine whether a complex adopts a tetrahedral of square planar geometry. Firstly, there are the steric factors - it is easier to adopt a tetrahedral configuration if the ligands are large bulky groups, this can be rationalised by considering the bond angles with regards to steric strain. For a tetrahedron the bond angles are 109  , whereas for the square planar there is an angle of 90  . Being closer together, the ligands cause steric repulsion between one another. Related to this is the size of central metal ion. A small metal ion causes ligands to be drawn closer to each other, again causing steric clash and for the same reasons, predisposes the geometry towards the tetrahedral configuration. Thus, small ligands and a large central metal ion favour more strongly the square planar configuration.
Secondly there are electronic factors. Due to the orientation of the ligands in a tetrahedral crystal field, the d orbital splitting is as such that for a d 8 configuration, four electrons would be forced to occupy the high energy e orbital set (one pair), whereas for a square planar configuration, all three orbital pairs (a 1g and e g) which lay below the barycentre are occupied and only one of the higher energy orbitals, the b 2g set. The b 1g orbital, which is massively destabilised, hence having hugely increased energy would remain empty. When considering the energy of all the split d-orbitals, it is most favourable to adopt the square planar configuration. For this reason also, it is always more favourable to pair up electrons in the d xy orbital set rather than put an unpaired electron into the b 1g set - thus d 8 square planar complexes are always diamagnetic.
Analysis of the infrared spectrum of thiocyanato complex.
The thiocyanate ion can bond to the metal centre at either end of the ligand. The propensity of the ligand to bond at one end or the other depends primarily, although not solely, on the 'hardness' of the metal ion. 'Hard' metals (those that are small and highly charged, ie., Class A metals - the first row transition elements) bond preferentially with the nitrogen end -  'soft' metals (class B - the heavier transition elements) bond with the sulphur terminus. Thus I would expect the bonding to be via the nitrogen terminus.
S. Ahrland, J. Chatt, and N. R. Davies, Quart. Rev.,12, 265 (1958).
The carbon-nitrogen triple bond present in cyanates, isocyanates and thiocyanates typically causes a strong adsorption band between 2285-1990cm -1, which is a wider band than for the triple bond present in nitriles and cyanides. This band is responsible for the carbon-nitrogen stretch vibration, which are observed generally at lower wavenumbers in complexes bonded to the N terminus (    2050cm -1) than those bonded at the S terminus (closer to 2100cm -1). In addition, there is a peak at 860-760cm -1 (for N bonded) or at 720-690cm -1 (for S bonded); however, these peaks can quite easily be obscured by other resonants and so are not always useful for structure elucidation. Finally, it has been suggested that the M-N and M-S bond vibration can be used to determine the type of bonding, however this wavenumber is very sensitive to the overall structure of the complex and so it not a usual method employed for analysis.
L.M. Venanzi, J. Chem. Soc., 1958, 719.
I draw conflicting conclusions from the spectrum. I would expect a nitrogen associated complex due to the hard nature of the metal ion, however the analysis of spectrum implies both types of bonding. There is more spectral evidence of sulphur associated to the metal; it is also possible that one ligand is nitrogen associated and the other thiocyanate is sulphur associated.
On grounds of the spectrum alone, I would have to say that the complex was sulphur associated.
With application of group theory to the modes of vibration of the cis and trans isomers of the planar MX 2L 2 complex, it should be possible to spectrometrically distinguish between the two.
From the molecular representations, it can be found that the cis-isomer belongs to the D 2h point group, whilst the trans-isomer belongs to the C 2v point group. Using the reduction formula we find that the vibrations of the cis-isomer are 2A 1 and 2B 1, of which all are IR active. However, for the case of the trans-isomer the vibrations are 2A 1g, B 2u and B 3u, out of which four, there are only two that are IR active (the 2A 1g are symmetrically degenerate and are thus not active). Using the simple harmonic oscillator approximation, the energies of the vibrations can be predicted - the M-N bond stretch vibrations are expected to be of higher energy and hence higher wavenumber, since the mass of Nitrogen is lower than that of Phosphorous. Hence, for trans- C 2v isomer we expect to observe four distinct peaks for the stretch vibrations whereas for the cis- D 2h isomer we expect to see only two.
