The principal contribution of micro morphology analyses are that it enables simultaneous new high-resolution analysis of the microscopic properties of individual sediments and artefactual and bioarchaeological remains, within precise depositional and post depositional contexts in occupation deposits. These are one of the critical sources of gaining sociocultural and environmental information, and becoming an integral part of the excavation process. (Matthews.2005: 355-356).
Furthermore the samples examined will enable study of the use of space in early agricultural and urban sites including   atalh  y  k in Turkey around 7400-6200BC.   atalh  y  k is known as one of the largest and most complex of sociocultural Neolithic settlements. The sample deposits, which applied to this report, mainly include palaeoecological sequences and landscapes, architectural materials, plant remains and dung, sequences of floors and deposits and ritual contexts(Renfrew and Bahn 2000:236).
These micro-stratigraphic sequences and micro-residues in accumulated occupation deposits contribute to identify the trace of routine practices, microenvironment and aspects of material culture as well as exceptional events and changes through time and across space form its foundation to closure. In short, information of the complex spatial organisation and chronological cycles of domestic, ritual and economic activities within building are explored by archaeologist at the micro scale. (Matthews.2005:355-356).
Thus, this report mainly includes the basic outline of research questions, micro-morphological methodology employed in sample collection, and thin section preparation.
Neolithic sites in the ancient Near East often represent planning within individual buildings and settlements. In Neolithic Near East, planning is often represented. This evidence largely suggests that there are powerful organisations for sharing and maintaining sociocultural conventions. Moreover, the traces of ritual features are identified from this micro morphological sample. This suggests that ritual is playing a significant role in both private and wider sociocultural cohesion in Ancient Near East. In 1999, to investigate preservation of organic and inorganic remains at the base of the mound, the research project was started. The main research aim of   atalh  y  k research project is to place the complex architecture and symbolism within its sociocultural and palaeoecological context, as well as investigating its nature of deposit, as well as origins and development.
However, one of the critical considerations in this aim is to establish the spatio-temporal and contextual relationships between the paintings and other features, as well as artefactual and bioarchaeological remains within the settlement and landscape. (Matthews.2005:355-356).
Generally, building 17 is known as complex micro stratigraphic sequences due to the various reasons. For example, changing concept of space, such as moving bin from southwest to north east. Although there are complexities, building 17 has variety of significant architecture remains, as hearths, floor surfaces, biological remains, and micro residues, as well as evidence of shrine 10. (Matthews 1999 ).
The sequence of wall plaster is from the south-eastern corner above hearths. Mostly the origin of this archaeological sediment is made of un-burnt white plasters, which comprised wall within the building 17(Matthews.2005:367), and red ochre is used for paintings, which is considered as evidence of ritual activities. Ritual feature has were always considered as higher, cleaner, although rarely on south wall. (Matthews.2006: 553).
All of the 51 plasters and washes in this sequence are coated in soot, except significantly the last plaster was perhaps related to ritual closure of the building. Many of these plasters have similar modal thickness, 200-400 um. (Matthews.2005:367).
Map 1 represents the location of this sequence.
This white plaster sequence include charred plants, shells, minerals (mica, quartz), bone, and lumps.
The technique of micro-morphology has been developed by the study of soil science, and has been improving internationally by standardized descriptive methodology.(Matthews.2005:356-357).
The most characteristic area of the sequence is selected for sample collection; especially it is applied least disturbed sample area by physical biotabation. Holding up the template or measurements 13.5  6.5cm sample area where including most characteristic units, the most boundaries between units, or the most interesting feature. Mainly, samples are collected 1 to 2 metre intervals in order to study spatial area in the field.
The lid is placed against the section face vertically, and scores its outline into the section face with a knife. Removed and marked the outline of the sample on the section drawing with its sample number.
The sediment cut from the vertical sides of the sample with a large Swiss army knife. Cut slot to a depth of 8-10cm deep. The vertical slots should be angled into the centre of the sample in order to encourage the sample to separate from the section face later.
The sediments should be cut from the top edge of the sample, as well as from the base of the sample.
The sample should be placed face down onto the tissues, top upper most, it is better to keep sample in this during the wrapping procedure. Wrap the sample again with slightly tighter.
Label the site name, sample number, site references, context type, date, and arrows indicating the top and the face on the sample.
Place labelled sample into the wooden box.
Keep the sample on an open shelf in order to dry the materials. In this case, sun light is not preferable.
The samples should be wrapped tighter with more tape for export. Cut away corners of tissue and tape in order to exposed sediment. Re label. (from hand out).
Examine the hand-specimen, noting the sample colour, grain-size, texture, the possible minerals, and any variations throughout the specimen.
The result from micro-morphological analysis can apply to examine and explore the trends in the principal depositional components and deposit-types, including material types and surfaces, plant remains and dung and occupation deposits for all thin section samples.( Matthews.2005:356-357).
Interpretation of material types, surfaces and textures would contribute to providing some answers to questions: the source location, the meanings of materials, major life cycles of building and particular events, as well as how these sediments are transformed into architectural material, because many plasters and mud bricks include well preserved impressions and siliceous remains of plants that would have served as stabilisers and provided added tensile strength and flexibility. (Matthews.2005:364 ):
Wall plasters within buildings have symbolic as well as functional meaning. At   atalh  y  k, field and microscopic analyses have identified marked contextual variation of wall plasters. For example, the large elaborate rooms were frequently coated with multiple layers of fine white plaster. Generally, white plaster was coated for living, sleeping and reception rooms. This material also protects the underlying wall surfaces from abrasion, as well as prevent from dust.
At   atalh  y  k, the majority of white wall plasters made from fine unconsolidated soft lime sediments with a silty clay particle size, which closely resemble naturally-occurring soft lime deposits with up to 95 per cent pure carbonates of calcium and magnesium, derived from Pleistocene lake reworking of Neogene limestone, which vary in calcium and magnesium concentrations in some outcrops.
Many of the wall plasters at   atalh  y  k were applied on top of a 5mm thick foundation layer of very pale brown / white silty clay with impressions of added vegetal stabilizers, which would have provided both strength and flexibility. Although the wall plaster in the southeast corner of Building 17 has a much rougher surface throughout the sequence.( Matthews.2005:360-367).
In integrative archaeobotanical research, micro morphology can contribute by enabling simultaneous analysis of a diverse range of plant materials within specific depositional context.
Generally, plant remains in thin-section have been identified by comparison initially to reference material in the microscope slide collection.( Matthews.2005:373-375).
The range of plant remains preserved in thin-section includes charred plant remains, which is only represented that have been subject to low temperature burning or reducing conditions, generally between 200-400  . On the other hand, there are also siliceous plant remains including phytoliths and calcitic ashes.
The term 'phytolith' refers anatomically only to specific silica bodies or short cells, which consistently often occur in building materials, were originally added as fresh vegetal stabilizers that did not fragment during manufacturing processes and provided strength and flexibility during use of the plaster.
Generally, micro morphological analysis of plant remains within single depositional units and study of their precise associations with other bioarchaeological, artefactural and mineralogical remains is contributing to interpretation of use and discard of plant remains and sociocultural and ecological perceptions and practices, including identification of dung in fuel and in animal pens. (Matthews.2005:373~375).
Charred plant remains are comparatively abundant in a range of occupation deposits, but are often small due to abrasion by trampling and sweeping and the thinness of residual lenses or layers. (Matthews.2005:375).
There may not be an exact correlation with trends in archaeobotanical analyses of charred plant remains and phytoliths.
The abundance and size of charred and siliceous plant remains have been plotted in Figures 1. (Matthews.2005:375).
According to the result from the micro morphological data of thin section no.5378.13, the mean abundance(%) and median size(mm) are both close to the figure1. Therefore it would be considered that the sample from thin section no. 5378.13 is relatively close to the average of micromorphological analysed data.
Although various remains have been identified through the micromorphological analysis by microscope, the particularity of the remains is still left. For example the details of charred plant remain. It would be improved with the increase of the ability of microscope and the future research about micromorphological study.
