We all know that water masses in the ocean are thought to be transferred by the wind. However, there are actually two ways that water is transferred in the ocean, one is by wind driven currents, the other is by wave driven currents which depend on the nonlinear interaction of waves with water parcels. Understanding the relationship between these two currents is important for understanding the movement of water masses in the oceans. The average effect of the wave driven current is defined as Stokes drift. Stokes drift is a subtle but effective operation which can be just as important to the total drift of a water mass as that of the wind driven component.
Lets consider parcel motion is limited in just the x direction (for simplicity). The water parcel is advected by a velocity field, u, so the x-coordinate of the parcel satisfies: (1).
We know that the velocity field has two components, a constant wind driven part and a wave driven part which is periodic in space and time: where (2).
The differential equation above, (1), is different to ordinary differential equations as the right hand side is a function of x as well as t. We therefore need to evolve the solution x(t) explicitly forward in time over one step. Therefore this gives us: (3).
Then by substituting in equation (2) we can come to a more useful differential equation. (4).
This equation gives us a foundation for exploring different aspects of Stokes drift and an opportunity to see how its characteristics depend on parameters such as wave amplitude. This equation represents the total drift as a function of time. We can write a computer program that solves this equation for a parcel that is released when x(t) equals zero and then continues to solve the equation for varying values of x(t) and t, to show how the x-coordinate varies as a function of time. Appendix 1 shows the program code for this particular operation and the resultant graph below, (graph 1), shows the total drift over time t (seconds). The x axis signifies time and the y axis represents the total drift.
As we can see from this graph, the total or actual drift varies in a periodic motion with time, with the 'wave' type quality originating from the wave driven component of equation (4).This is a superposition of both components and now we shall compare the actual drift of the parcel to the drift due to the wind driven part u 0 alone.
If we were to set the wave driven component to zero we should arrive at a linear relationship with drift and time. This is to be expected as we are removing the wave driven component which is periodic in both space and time. To compare the actual drift of the parcel to the drift due to the wind driven part alone we need to modify our original program and plot the two relationships on the same graph. In Appendix 2 I have set u 1 to zero (i.e. the wave driven component) and this has given me the straight line depicted in Graph 2 (green one). I have also plotted the result from Graph 1 onto the same set of axis so I can compare the two. As you can see there is only slight deviance from the linear relationship and increases only slightly over time. However, the deviance is enough to show that the wave driven component is an important factor in the total drift and that the movement of water is not totally governed by the wind.
The next step is to set c, the phase speed, to zero and repeat the experiment for varying amplitude of the wave field u 1. The result is represented in the above graph (Graph 3). This graph represents the drift varying with the amplitude of the wave field u 1. u 1 is on the x axis and varies between 0.0 and 1.5. Notice that the graph is linear up to the point where u 1 equals 1.0. This shows that beyond this point the total drift is mainly responsible by the wind driven component of the drift i.e. u 1 becomes negligible for a certain amount of time. It would be unreasonable to plot different values of u 1 against time because we are interested in how the drift varies with amplitude at each value of t. This hereby is my justification of rewriting my original program so that the graph represents axes of amplitude and total drift. The details of this modification plus a brief explanation can be found in Appendix 3.
We have been told that for small amplitudes u 1 of the wave field an approximate theory for Stokes drift exists. It states that the total drift of the parcel relative to the drift due to the wind field u 0 is approximately equal to, (5) so that it varies with the squared amplitude of the wave field . To show this we can again modify our original program to fit in with our new equation (5). We are now varying u 1 squared with total drift to show this approximate theory for Stokes drift exists for small amplitudes of u 1 i.e. u 1 is less than 1. To observe this relationship our program should yield a linear correlation between total drift and the square of the amplitude.
The x axis on the above graph is the square of the amplitude and the y axis is the total drift. This graph therefore proves that for small amplitudes of the wave field, equation (5) holds up and proves that this approximate theory for Stokes drift exists. This can be supplemented further by computing another graph of u 1 and total drift using equation 5. This time the relationship should resemble a curve very similar to a parabola but only in the positive quadrant as both total drift and amplitude are kept positive.
The x axis represents the amplitude and the y axis represents the total drift.
This report shows that these wave driven components have just as much influence on the movement of water masses as the wind driven components. The model has firstly shown that the actual drift of a wave is made up of two components, each yielding different graphical forms when separated i.e. the wind driven component is linear whereas the wave driven is periodic. It has also shown that the wave driven component is limited up to the point where the amplitude is 1.0. This could be because of the periodic nature of the component but it shows that there is some threshold amplitude of the wave component where its effect becomes irrelevant and the actual drift is determined by the wind alone. The model has finally shown that for small amplitudes of u 1 an approximate theory for Stokes drift exists. This approximation is important because we have already seen the consequences of when the amplitude of the wave driven component equals zero because its effect becomes negligible. Therefore this approximation for when the amplitude is small is important to the total drift of the parcels because without this, the wave driven component would not contribute at all and it would seem as if the wind driven component was the only variable important in the movement of water masses in the ocean.
