During the second millennium B.C. Cyprus was involved in an interregional trade network that spread from the Levant and Egypt in the east, to the Aegean and Sicily in the West. Maritime links throughout the region enabled the import and export of exotic goods such as ivory and lapis lazuli; as well as raw materials including Cypriot copper; and other commodities like spices and oil. Evidence of these trade routes can be ascertained through studying the distribution of regional pottery styles, and scientific provenancing of raw materials. Further information can be gathered from historical written sources such as the Amarna letters (Karageorghis 2002: 30) or the Mycenaean Linear B tablets from Knossos (Cline 1994: 60) and from material recovered from shipwrecks like those at Cape Gelidonya (Bass 1991) and Uluburun (Pulak 1997).
Cyprus was engaged in a number of different aspects of the Late Bronze Age Mediterranean trade network. The Cypriot communities were involved in the production and consumption, and the import and export of both raw materials and finished products. In addition, the Islanders also played a key administrative role and acted as an intermediary unit trading goods between different countries involved in this interregional trading system. The exploration of this subject also encompasses wider ranging issues beyond economic concerns, including social and political complexity, settlement hierarchy, and contemporary ideologies. Broodbank has effectively summarised it thus:
Through the investigation of the archaeological evidence and critical evaluation of current research, these ideas will be developed, with the aim of explicating the role of Cypriot communities in Eastern Mediterranean trade in the second millennium.
The second millennium BC marks the transition between the prehistoric and protohistoric Bronze Ages, a definition based on the existence of contemporary written records which refer to Cyprus. The period under investigation here is the Late Bronze Age which, within the geographical confines of Cyprus, can also be referred to as the Late Cypriot (LC). Figure 1 presents the currently accepted chronological sequence for this period in Cyprus.
The Late Bronze Age in Cyprus is characterised by an increase in population leading to the establishment of settlements in new areas and the development of urban centres with public and monumental architecture. Two other major developments that took place during this period, which are particularly relevant to the question under consideration here, are the intensification of copper production and the development of extensive trade and exchange networks within the eastern Mediterranean including links with Egypt, the Levant, Minoan Crete and Helladic Greece (Knapp 1994: 282). This marks the change from "an isolated village-based culture into an international, urban-orientated complex society" (Knapp 1994: 271) - that is, a society controlled by an emerging elite.
It has been said that Cyprus played 'a pivotal role' in long-distance trade (Steel 2004: 169). The following discussion examines the nature of this role and begins by exploring some of the reasons why this might have been the case - notably its strategic position in the Mediterranean geographical context.
Geographical factors such as the location of Cyprus and its proximity to other major participants in the network, as well as the natural resources available, were fundamental in establishing the Island 's position in external trade and social relations. The island lies within sight of the mainland, being located 70km south of Turkey and 95km west of Syria. To the south Egypt is a distance of 400km and the first of the Aegean islands, Rhodes, is 480km to the east (Knapp 1994: 271). The map of the Mediterranean illustrated in figure 2 shows the location of Cyprus in relation to other areas in the region. Given these distances, it would appear that Cyprus would be an ideal place from which to launch ships laden with Cypriot goods to return with exotic items from foreign shores, which could then be distributed and consumed locally or exchanged elsewhere for other desirable goods.
Distance is only one of the factors affecting maritime trade relations. Other environmental aspects also need to be considered including coastal sea currents, prevailing wind direction and seasonal patterns in climate, as well as natural hazards such as reefs and rocks (Knapp 1997: 155). In an archaeological context this is obviously not an easy task, firstly because changes in sea-level since the Bronze Age may have changed the coastline and depth of the water so offshore rocks may have been closer inland or vice versa, and submerged obstacles which may cause problems with modern shipping routes may have been deeper (and thus not a problem) in antiquity. Although Simmons has suggested that modern sea-level were attained by this period in Cyprus (1999: 10-11). Assessment of sea-level change has shown variation between regions partly due to erosion and aggradation (Knapp 1997: 155) meaning that an assumption of a certain rise/fall in one area cannot be extended a priori to the whole of the Mediterranean. Similarly, the meteorological conditions experienced in the Mediterranean today are not necessarily the same as those during the Bronze Age. Both of these phenomena are affected by tectonic activity (Lowe & Walker 1997: 15, 61) and since the Mediterranean coastline is one of the world 's most active areas with regards to plate tectonics and volcanic activity we cannot presume that Bronze Age meteorological conditions would have been the same as those of today (Knapp 1997: 155).
However, with these limitations in mind, and with consideration of the other environmental and geographical factors outlined above, Knapp has proposed that the most likely shipping route would have followed anti-clockwise currents (see figure 3) sticking to the Levantine and Anatolian coastline from south to north and east to west, respectively while travel to Cyprus and other offshore islands would have necessitated open-sea crossings (1997:155). However, this is a uni-directional explanation, a point which is not dealt with by Knapp. Due to strong currents this route is unlikely to have been successful for the return journey, (figure 3) so presumably we are expected to believe that ships sailed in some kind of circuit, returning via North Africa perhaps? Depending on the origin and destination of the ship, this may have been a long way round. If these boats were travelling from Turkey to the Southern Levant, for example, sailing via Crete would appear somewhat of a diversion. Therefore, while the coastal route may have been the main south to north route, I would argue for the use of Cyprus as a stepping-stone island for journeys in the opposite direction, enabling ships to sail across the flow of the current rather than against it. This opinion is shared by Manning and Hulin who have proposed the most likely route as travelling east via Rhodes and the northern coast of Cyprus, since the ship would never have to leave the sight of land, making it easier to navigate and negates the need to travel into the 'unknown' (2005: 277-8). Following this route, all passing ships would have been in view of Cyprus and vice versa, (Manning & Hulin 2005: 279) as illustrated in figure 4.
Conversely, McGrail argues against direct journeys, suggesting instead an anti-clockwise route similar to that proposed by Knapp, which he has described as a 'tramp route' linking Egypt, the Levant, Anatolia, Greece and Crete calling at a number of destinations in the Mediterranean (1991:88). This is supported by, and could provide an explanation for, the range of the objects found on shipwrecks, for example, the Uluburun yielded goods of Mycenaean, Cypriot, Egyptian, Babylonian, Kassite, Northern European and African origin (Bass 1991: 74). The other possible explanation for this diversity would be the export of non-indigenous goods previously imported from elsewhere which will be discussed below.
Whether or not Cyprus was a stepping-stone between regions or just one stage on a continuing voyage, it is clear from the quantities of imported pottery and traces of other goods that Cyprus was a prominent figure in the interregional trade network. This may have been facilitated by the physical characteristics of the Cypriot maritime landscape, that is to say, an abundance of natural harbours and suitable landfalls, including inner harbours accessible by river at some sites such as Enkomi, Maroni and Kition (Knapp 1994: 271) and some ports which, despite not displaying typical 'berthing or beaching features' would have offered protection from poor weather conditions (Knapp 1997: 158).
Arguably, the most important contribution to interregional trade in the Late Bronze Age made by Cyprus was the production and export of copper. The very name for copper is derived from the Roman term 'Cyprium aes' meaning 'copper of Cyprus' (Tatton-Brown 1997: 30) and attests to its significance throughout antiquity. Copper ore was an abundant natural resource on the island of Cyprus, found in the Troodos Mountains, and its exploitation in the Bronze Age has been cited as one of the contributing factors to the re-organisation and increasing complexity of social relations during this period (Knapp 1994: 282). The urban centres which developed as a result of the need to organise the administration of the copper trade (Knapp 1994: 271) were found in mainly coastal locations, for example, Enkomi, Hala Sultan Tekke, Kition and Kourion and this has been taken as an indication of the outward looking, orientation towards foreign trade (Keswani 1996: 219). That copper was central and of paramount importance to the society and economy during the Bronze Age is substantiated by evidence of metallurgical activities at almost every town site (Keswani 1996: 219).
Copper ore deposits are also known from other sources in the Mediterranean, including Sardinia (Gale 1991: 201) and East Attica, an important source in the Aegean (Catling 1991: 9). Catling concluded that "Cypriot copper was used by the Minoan and Mycenaean economies, but not on the large scale that I, for one, had supposed" (1991:9). Contrary to this, Muhly has argued that Mycenaean Greece and Minoan Crete must have been copper-importing regions since both regions have failed to yield any remains of the heavy bronze smithing tools used in copper-production which have been found in Cyprus and Sardinia (1991: 189). Furthermore, evidence from Kommos on the southern coast of Crete testifies to the import of Cypriot copper, in the form of oxhide ingot fragments while the discovery of a Pithos at the same site provides additional support for trade relations between the two islands.
The prominence of Cypriot copper has been demonstrated through scientific analysis of 354 ingots found on the Uluburun shipwreck (figure 5) to determine their provenance, almost all of which have been interpreted as Cypriot in origin (Karageorghis 2002: 30). However, these results should be treated with caution due to the nature of the technique, and of course, the potential for metal recycling. Lead isotope analysis, which has been used in this instance, is able to exclude potential origins for materials by comparing samples with raw materials of known provenance. Each source will have a characteristic isotopic signature and, if the results from the samples do not fall into the same isotopic field, we must discount a common source. Where this becomes problematic is in the interpretation stages. Unfortunately, in cases where the results do fall within the isotopic field of a known source, there is no guarantee that the sample is definitely derived from this source given that two or more geographically distinct ore deposit may well fall in the same isotopic field (Muhly 1991: 190). For example, analysis has demonstrated that a number of Sardinian ingots fall into the Cypriot isotopic field (Muhly 1991: 189), suggesting that they (or at least the raw materials used) were imported from Cyprus but Muhly has proposed that ore deposits in the west and central Mediterranean may have similar lead profiles to those from Cyprus (1991: 190). Gale disputes the criticism of the approach, arguing that any overlaps in isotope profiles can be eradicated when all three available lead isotope ratios are utilised (1991: 205) and accepts that most of the copper ingots found throughout the Mediterranean could well have come from Cypriot sources. Further research into lead isotope studies is needed before any substantial conclusions can be drawn.
However, Manning and Hulin have dismissed the need for provenance analysis, deeming it "almost irrelevant to a social archaeology of material culture, since they highlight patterns of production and distribution rather than consumption" (2005: 271). They have argued that it is not the provenance of an artefact that dictates its value or status as an 'exotic' and therefore, highly desirable product, instead it is related to the way in which the object was acquired, that is to say, the more difficulty there was obtaining the object, the more value placed upon it. This may have been unrelated to distance given the maritime transport technology available, but would have been the result of specialised craft skills in the manufacturing of the object and the existence of social links with people to facilitate trade. The act of acquisition itself may have been more important than the goods being imported (Manning & Hulin 2005: 271). A large number of oxhide ingots and fragments found in Sardinia have recently been identified as being of Cypriot origin, imported despite the fact that the central Mediterranean had its own natural deposits of copper ore (Muhly 1991: 189). Various possibilities could be proposed to explain this phenomenon but it is most likely that there existed a reason beyond the practicalities of the need for copper as a raw material, such as strengthening social and trade relations, or the perception of Cypriot copper as more valuable or 'exotic' than local sources. Therefore, it would appear that Manning and Hulin have contradicted their own line of argument given that in order to see these acquisitions and trade relations in the archaeological record it is necessary to observe the movement of these objects from one place to another- an investigation which surely requires the knowledge of the origin of products through provenance analysis.
Cypriot metalworking played a significant part in trade relations through the introduction of standardised values and weights. The archetypal unit of copper was in ingots shaped like an oxhide, weighing between 25kg and 28kg (Steel 2004: 167) as shown in figure 6. Knapp has argued that copper oxhide ingots along with other bronze and stone weights such as those found at Kalavasos- Ayios Dhimitrios would have "facilitated long-distance trade, and served to stabilise a system in which politico-economic relations were always changing" (1997: 159). Such a standardisation of commodities would have made trading overseas easier through the exchange of regulated weights and amounts of produce. The written sources support the standardisation in measurements. In the Amarna letter EA 34 sent from the King of Alashiya to the Pharaoh of Egypt, the King wrote "I send you with my messenger 100 talents of copper" (Cline 1994: 61) which indicates that both the King and the Pharaoh shared a common understanding of what a 'talent' was and also confirms that the copper from Cyprus was being exported to Egypt. Contrary to this, Gale, has highlighted the variation in copper oxhide ingots, having observed difference in their size ranging from 30-60cm long and weighing between 10kg and 37kg, citing as a specific example the 13kg difference which exists between the heaviest and lightest ingots discovered on the Cape Gelidonya shipwreck (1991: 198). Tablets from Knossos, however, support the existence the standardisation of ingot weights, for example, in tablet Oa 730, sixty ingots are stipulated as weighing 52 'talents' while Oa 733 indicates that ten ingots weigh six or eight 'talents' (Gale 1991: 198) which works out as 0.87 and 0.8 'talents' per ingot respectively. Whether or not the standardisation of copper ingots was a Cypriot innovation or whether they conformed to conventions set elsewhere, the fact remains that Cyprus provided a large amount of the metal for trade in the Mediterranean which was supplied in forms that seem to have been part of the wider economic network, of which Cyprus was a major participant.
Cypriot pottery has been found throughout the Mediterranean, in Egypt, the Aegean and even as far west as Sardinia. It could be argued that Cyprus was the primary producer of high quality ceramic tableware. Cline has proposed that the Mycenaeans and Minoans were importing Cypriot fine, luxury tableware given that milk bowls from Cyprus were the second most popular ceramic import into the Aegean, (after Canaanite jars) and 64 examples have been recovered from Late Bronze Age Aegean contexts, including the 20 found on the Uluburun shipwreck (1994: 60). A large quantity of Cypriot pottery has also been discovered in Crete including Red Polished Amphorae at Knossos and White Slip, White Shaved, Red Lustrous and Base Ring wares throughout the island (Vagnetti & Lo Schiavo 1989: 218).
The most popular ceramic styles seem to have been the White Slip and Base Ring wares, which Karageorghis has rationalised as being due to the benefits of the impermeable surface of the fabric and hard clays used in manufacture (2002: 25). These properties would have made the vessels suitable for storing and transporting liquids, such as perfumed oils. Cypriot ceramic vessels, particularly large pithoi were used to transport a range of different commodities including glass beads and smaller pottery artefacts (Vagnetti & Lo Schiavo 1989: 221). Perishable materials which have not survived in the archaeological record may also have been traded in Cypriot pottery containers. For example, jugs, juglets and flasks in typical Cypriot styles, that is to say, Base Ring and Red Lustrous wares, were used to store and transport opium from Cyprus to Egypt. Gas chromatography has confirmed the nature of these residues (Karageorghis 2002: 13). Similarly, the Uluburun shipwreck has yielded evidence for a range of organic produce which have not survived in dryland contexts including coriander, grapes, almonds, pomegranates and olives, the latter two being contained in a pithos (figure 8) and amphorae respectively (Bass 1991: 74). Therefore, a large part of the trading network relied on the production of ceramics, not just for export of the artefacts themselves but also for the transportation of other goods.
Cypriot potters also inspired imitations of their vessels by potters in other regions within the trade network. Cypriot-style pottery in the form of Base-Ring ware juglets and bowls has been found in tombs at Thapsos on the east coast of Sicily, but since the fabric of these vessels (grey clay) is not found in Cyprus they have been interpreted as a local imitation of Cypriot wares (Karageorghis 2002: 36). Cyprus was not just responsible for inspiration but also for preservation of ceramic styles. Towards the end of the Late Cypriot II period, the import of Mycenaean ceramics became difficult due to the disruption in the Eastern Mediterranean and Aegean regions, so the Cypriots began to imitate Mycenaean pottery styles particularly the 'dinner sets' and examples of these have been at Kalavassos - Ayios Dhimitrios (Karageorghis 2002:84). Cyprus became "the guardian of Mycenaean civilisation" (Karageorghis 2002: 116) by conserving the political structure, language, writing and art, including pottery.
As with copper, establishing the origin of a ceramic vessel can be quite problematic. Firstly, there is the possibility that the raw materials themselves were imported from a distance, perhaps even overseas, and consequently, the object may have been manufactured in a place far removed from the origin of the material (Catling 1991: 6). Secondly, "one of the worst jokers is mixture" (Catling 1991: 7), particularly in pottery manufacture, there is no guarantee that the clay used has all been sourced from the same clay bed, one vessel may be made from clay gathered in two or more different regions, making it difficult to assess its provenance. In addition to the difficulties posed by materials, the use of pottery styles to establish origins is also more complicated than it might appear. For example, 'Mycenaean' pottery found in Cyprus had been variously interpreted as: Mycenaean pottery which has been imported from Greece; pots made by Mycenaean settlers living in Cyprus; and Cypriot vessels made in the style of Mycenaean pottery (Catling 1991: 9).
Karageorghis used the term 'entrep  t' to describe the city of Ugarit on the Syrian coast given that throughout the 18 th and 17 th centuries B.C, it was the place where much trading was carried out. "Ugarit was the entrep  t through which goods had to pass both to and from Crete and Cyprus" (Karageorghis 2002: 11). However, when the large urban centres such as Enkomi developed on the south and east coast of Cyprus, the trade which had previously been conducted at Ugarit was taken over by the 'rulers' and 'entrepreneurs' living at these sites (Karageorghis 2002: 11). So Cyprus became the entrep  t of the Mediterranean trade network.
The Oxford English Dictionary defines 'entrep  t' as "1. a warehouse for temporary storage of goods in transit, 2. a commercial centre for import and export, and for collection and distribution" (Thompson 1995: 452). It is, therefore, an accurate label for Late Bronze Age Cyprus given the function of the coastal centres which have been described as "key nodes of communication, both within and beyond the island" (Knapp 1997: 158) and the range of imported goods that which have been recovered at these sites. The presence of Cypro-Minoan tablets (although as yet undeciphered), such as the example discovered at Enkomi, has been interpreted as verification of administration and 'official' activity, on the basis that script would have been developed/ adopted in response to organisational requirements (Keswani 1996: 222; Karageorghis 2002: 17). Written sources which have been translated provide further evidence of Cyprus as an intermediary administrative centre. Tablets from Knossos and Pylos written in Mycenaean Linear B script include the phrase 'ku-pi-ri-jo' which is used to denote the Cypriot origin of people and products (Karageorghis 2002: 60). The inscriptions on these tablets describe various activities being performed by the Cypriots and from this Muhly has inferred that "individuals designated as being from Cyprus seem to have held important positions in the administration of the palace economy" (1991: 181). So in addition to organising overseas trade from the coastal centres in Cyprus, the Cypriots may have also been involved with foreign administration abroad in some kind of ambassador-type diplomatic role.
Evidence for storage, as described in the definition above, can be found at Kalavasos- Ayios Dhimitrios where more than 50 pithoi, up to 2m tall, have been found in areas known as the 'Pithos Hall' and 'North Pithos Magazine' with an estimated storage capacity of approximately 50,000 litres (Steel 2004: 159-60). Gas chromatography has determined that a large number of these pithoi contained olive oil (Steel 2004: 60). The centralised storage of these pithoi may indicate the redistribution to both internal and external sources. It has been observed that it was common for all commercial centres in the Mediterranean to accumulate luxury goods such as gold, silver, ivory and lapis lazuli, which may have been for the purposes of trade, the acquiring of stock before selling on but this accumulation has also been interpreted as "a symbol of economic strength" (Karageorghis 2002: 30).
There have been various debates about the nationality of the ship (and its crew) that was discovered off the coast at Cape Gelidonya and a possible Cypriot origin has been discussed (Bass 1991: 69). Evidence to support this claim can be found through the study of the ship 's cargo which included Cypriot scrap bronze and copper ingots, the provenance of which have been determined by lead isotope analysis (Bass 1991: 71), although, as previously discussed, there are limitations to interpretations using this technique. Pithoi containing unused Cypriot pottery vessels, lamps and wall brackets were also among the artefacts recovered from the ship (Bass 1991: 75). Bass has also observed that the abundance of objects from one place being found elsewhere, for example, the wealth of Mycenaean pottery found throughout the Levant, Cyprus and Egypt does not inform us about the nationality or origin of the traders or the ships used (1991: 73). These artefacts may well have been brought directly from Greece by Mycenaean ships and crews or alternatively, they may have been acquired en route by traders from the east. Therefore, if the shipwrecks such as Cape Gelidonya and Uluburun can be inferred, though their cargoes to be of Cypriot origin (in itself quite problematic) then it could be argued that one of the roles fulfilled by Cypriot communities in the Late Bronze Age was as traders, gathering products from across the Mediterranean.
Cyprus has been described as a 'transhipment point' and 'middleman' (Cline 1994: 61). It shall be argued here that the Island was an international distribution centre, importing goods from across the Mediterranean and exporting them to other countries within the same trade network. Written evidence to support this theory can be found in a number of texts from Egyptian, Hittite, Ugaritic and Mesopotamian sources which describe the goods traded from Cyprus during the Late Bronze Age. It should be noted in reference to the written sources that many of them refer to 'Alashiya' which is widely accepted to be Cyprus, or possibly one of the urban centres such as Enkomi (Keswani 1996: 219), and likewise, the place known as 'Isy' is also assumed to be Cyprus (Karageoghis 2002: 14). Therefore, any evidence provided by these sources is subject to the presupposition that Alashiya or Isy and Cyprus are in fact one and the same, which has the potential to be disproved by further research or new discoveries. In the Temple of Amon at Karnak, for example, there is a list of tributes from Isy which include copper, lead, horses, timber, ivory and lapis lazuli and since the latter two items are not indigenous to Cyprus, it must be assumed that they imported these goods before exporting them to Egypt (Karageorghis 2002: 14).
Towards the end of the period, the Aegean and eastern Mediterranean suffered a political and economic collapse (an event which lies beyond the scope of this essay). This had a detrimental effect on their participation in the trade network. Cyprus however, remained unaffected, in fact it expanded trade relations to become "the pivotal link and centre of consumption in the east Mediterranean" (Sherratt & Sherratt 1991: 374) in comparison to the Aegean which had become marginalised. Cyprus was also an independent provider of copper outside the expanding Hittite and Egyptian empires (Sherratt & Sherratt 1991: 370-1).
Cyprus performed many varied roles in the interregional trade network during the Late Bronze Age. The abundance of copper ore deposits were exploited as a raw material which was then traded, along with other goods, making the island a key player in the network and enabling relationships with other regions to be intensified. It also functioned as an entrep  t, serving both as an intermediary between different regions, importing and exporting goods throughout the Mediterranean, and also as a central administrative power as demonstrated by the evidence from coastal urban centres such as Enkomi. This was facilitated not only by the social relations that existed between Cyprus and other areas, but also due to its prime location on shipping routes, intervisibility with the mainland (both the Levantine and Anatolian coasts) and the natural harbours provided by the islands coastline.
