Ecosystem properties are regulated through interactions between abiotic factors such as soil fertility and climate and the functional traits of individual organisms that occur in a community (Hooper,. et al, 2005, Naeem,. et al, 1999). Two components in biodiversity, species richness which refers to the number of species present in a unit scale of a habitat, and functional diversity; the range of traits in which each species is distinguished from one another in a particular species pool, have been the focus of interests in biodiversity-ecosystem functioning study. Many research findings support that an increase in diversity leads to an increase in ecosystem functioning, which is often measured by productivity. If species added to a community differed in spatial and temporal patterns of resource uptake, an increase in diversity level would enhance the resource use efficiency which results in greater productivity (Kinzig,. et al, 2002, Loreau,. et al, 2002, Naeem,. et al, 1999). This review will outline the proposed mechanisms for this outcome in biodiversity-ecosystem functioning relationship and examine some aspects in the natural environment which have been given little attention in research but should be considered as important factors affecting those biodiversity effects.
The observed response patterns of ecosystem properties to changes in diversity; an increase in ecosystem functioning as diversity level increases, have led to suggest three qualitatively explicit mechanisms called Biodiversity Effects (Loreau,. et al, 2002, Naeem,. et al, 1999, Hector,. et al, 1999,);.
This model states that highly diverse ecosystem is likely to contain some superior species which have strong effects on ecosystem functioning (Kinzig,. et al, 2002, Hector,. et al, 1999). This is based on the assumption that some forms of competitive success at species level are associated with high productivity that is measurable in quantitative way.
However, there are some contradictory arguments that competitive interactions in greater diversity may correlates to other properties irrespective of growth rate and production, and that there may be some important rare species with low biomass production but have significant impacts on ecosystem functioning (Hooper,. et al, 2005). There are an increasing number of experiments which investigate the determinants of competitive success and dominance hierarchy in ecosystem properties other than biomass production such as nutrient supply dynamics, decomposition processes (Loreau & Hector, 2001, Tilman, 1996, van Ruijven & Berendse, 2005). Therefore, it is expected that better explanation on this effect would be suggested together with those various new approaches.
Complementarity arises through niche partitioning between species, resulting in the alleviation in interspecific competition over the limited resources (Loreau,. et al, 2002, Naeem,. et al, 1999, Hooper,. et al, 2005). Ecosystem functioning should be correlated to biodiversity if resources limit the growth of species present in a community and if the resource partitioning allows for the increased efficiency in total resource use over temporal and spatial scale such as through exploiting different root depth and structure, rather than causing competitive exclusion by developing the same architecture (Naeem,. et al, 1999).
Facilitation occurs when a certain species has the ability to mitigate the harsh environmental conditions to which a community is exposed or when there is supply flow of resources from one species to others which is beneficial to the survivorship of the recipients (Hooper,. et al, 2005, Loreau & Hector, 2001).
While the consequences of sampling effects would be the dominance of some species achieved through the reduction in the biomass production of other species in high diversity level, niche complementarity and facilitation would cause overyielding; the total biomass in species mixture exceeds the yield of the most productive species in monoculture (Hector,. et al, 1999, van Ruijven & Berendse, 2005). It is predicted that those biodiversity effects would eventually reach saturating response as diversity increases.
However, it is argued that those effects are not mutually exclusive but a continuum effect (Hooper,.et al, 2005). High diversity is expected to contain both dominant species and complementary species and the distinction between the effects is not straightforward. In addition, some studies have pointed out that sampling effects may not be relevant to natural ecosystem since experiments often regard the species assemblage in a habitat as a random selection from the total species pool which does not occur in natural system in which a community develops via various biotic and abiotic interactions and selection mechanisms over time (Hooper,. et al, 2005).
Furthermore, it has been found that community composition as well as species richness and functional diversity in a community are important factors in regulating ecosystem properties. For instance, nutrient retention is suggested to be dependent upon the differences in phenological, biochemical structures of the dominant species. Soil processes such as decomposition, organic matter dynamics are regulated by microorganisms and fungi activities of whose are influenced by the species composition and functional characteristics of particular species (Bardgett & Shine, 1999, Hooper & Vitousek, 1998, Wardle, et al, 1997).
As already discussed, use of productivity for the measurement of biodiversity effects may not be fully self-explanatory to understand the mechanisms for the effects of species richness and functional diversity on ecosystem functioning. The response patterns of experimental plant community to modification in diversity level are likely to depend on the nature of processes measured and on the features and compartments of ecosystems. Some research using herbaceous plants found that the level of soil nutrient is reduced with increasing plant diversity due to the increase in process rate of an ecosystem at higher diversity (Loreau & Hector, 2001, Tilman, 1996). On the other hand, some studies on perennials found that ecosystem responses such as nutrient retention or nutrient use efficiency were at the highest in communities with only a couple of species (Hooper,. et al, 2005). Therefore, generalisation of the increasing new evidence from recent experiments on different aspects in this biodiversity-ecosystem functioning relationship is required.
One of the important indications from recent findings is that the magnitude of biodiversity effects varies not only with the functional traits of species in a community but also with the environmental context (Cardinale, et al, 2000, Dimitrakopoulos & Schmid, 2004, Fridley, 2001, Hooper,. et al, 2005). Differences in functional characteristics, distribution patterns, types of resources acquired by species involved are argued to affect complementarity and facilitation. Abiotic and biotic environmental conditions alter the strength of those effects and generate more variability in ecosystem functioning. It is predicted that resource enrichment may induce an increase in complementairy and the magnitude of facilitation is greater under unproductive, stressful environment (Hooper,. et al, 2005). However, the recognition on the importance of components in environment and its variation in terms of the control over complementarity and facilitation in a community has yet been under development in empirical study.
Environment is heterogeneous in both abiotic and biotic processes over spatial and temporal scales, resulting in the formation of patchiness in a habitat in physically discrete units. For organisms with limited mobility and specific environmental requirements, environment is a collection of habitat patches in terms of their survivorship while organisms in turn create a heterogeneous landscape due to their chance occurrence in environment (Dimitrakopoulos & Schmid, 2004, Tokeshi, 1999).
Spatial and temporal variation in the environment provides the potential for organisms to respond to and to exploit available resources in different ways (Hector,. et al, 1999, Loreau & Hector, 2001, Naeem,. et al, 1999). Changes in the supply rate of nutrients, fluctuation in precipitation and temperature in periodic or non-periodic patterns are examples. Such heterogeneity provides not only disturbance but also opportunities for organisms in establishing a community. Then, question arises; what properties of organisms and functional traits of species affect ecosystem functioning in the presence of environmental heterogeneity and vice versa (Crawley, et al, 1999, Kinzig,. et al, 2002)?.
Each species has particular environmental requirements means that under the variety of circumstances in the environment, there are some probabilities that new arriving species in a community may adapt to underexploited resource in complementary ways, leading to the increase in resource utilisation (Kinzig,. et al, 2002, Hooper,. et al, 2005). Although available data which examine the effects of environmental heterogeneity in ecosystem functioning are limited up to date, there are increasing interests and empirical studies on this aspect.
Dimitrakopoulos and Schmid (2004) investigated the relationship between the change in soil volume and biodiversity effects and found that the increase in soil volume leads to an increase in complementarity as available biotope space for individual organisms increased. In spit of the facts that this experiment deliberately chose species with different architecture to promote complementariry and that the experimental period of about three months might not have been long enough to allow the development of dominance hierarchy, those findings revealed the importance of physical spatial scale to alter the performance of species in biodiversity experiment.
Another study by Wijesinghe, et al (2005) put a focus on differences in spatial patterns of nutrient supply. This experiment hypothesised that if nutrient supply was patchy in space, individual species would promote the growth of roots in response to the intense competition over nutrients. Results showed that heterogeneous nutrient supply had significant effects on community biomass and belowground to aboveground biomass ratio. As predicted, there was an increase in the growth of roots in patchy nutrient pool. However, mechanism to induce this change in biomass investment was unclear. In terms of species composition, responses of individual species varied. Dominant species tended to increase biomass production with a decrease in nutrient density while colonist species showed a complex performance. Although the distinction of those variable responses by each species in developing community structure was uncertain, it was found that differences in nutrient supply would alter the relative importance of interspecific competition among species. This research also argued that the scale of heterogeneity by which individual organisms are affected is likely to be an important determinant in inducing differences in performance of a community. In experiment, it is required that the extent of heterogeneity over space or time should be carefully managed in order to create impacts on the level of individual organisms, otherwise a community would not recognise the difference in the condition as significant to alter the responses.
An experiment by Fridely (2003) also pointed out the complexity in evaluating those various responses. When plant community was exposed to difference light and fertility environment in his experiment, overyielding occurred under low fertility treatment which poses a difficulty in interpretation. It was suggested that a reduction in the performance of the dominant species allowed the enhanced complementarity in light partitioning among other species and resulted in the overyielding, but the evidence is not sufficient to explain the relationship between the environmental conditions and species evenness.
Hence, heterogeneity in resource availability would add a new dimension in biodiversity effects. It is predicted that effects of species richness on ecosystem functioning would likely to be less significant than that of environmental components which controls the performance of species while species richness can impose changes in the environment (Fridely, 2003, Kinzig,. et al, 2002). Research still needs establishment of data for synthesis to a theory that demonstrate the influence of environmental conditions on the strength of biodiversity-ecosystem functioning relationship.
Distributional and colonisational patterns of organisms are dependent upon the mobility and dispersability of species, thus individual species tend to create aggregated populations in some spatial scale (Tokeshi, 1999). This leads to form patchiness in a habitat occupied by different species and provide some possibilities for the coexistene of species through spatial niche differentiation, i.e. resource partitioning. This heterogeneity in community structure has given little attention in biodiversity experiments while the interaction of neighbouring individuals is a crucial factor in affecting the development of organisms in a community (De Boeck, et al, 2006). Aggregation increase intraspecific competition between individuals, resulting in the formation of monoculture-alike patches in a habitat. In such a circumstance, complementariry is expected to be reduced to some extent (De Boeck, et al, 2006, Stoll & Prati, 2001).
A model developed by De Boeck, et al (2006) demonstrated that aggregation alter the relative significance of biodiversity effects. Under high clumping condition, resource use efficiency both in aboveground and belowground is reduced due to a decrease in complementarity, i.e. the increase in intraspecific competition between neighbouring individuals of the same species, resulting in the decrease in overall productivity. In nature, however, distribution patterns of resource are heterogeneous hence when species are clumped into patches which suit to their requirement, productivity is likely to be increased. Moreover, contrary to the current view that species richness promotes complementarity, this model showed that direct spatial complementariry is neutral with the addition of new species in neighbourhood. In terms of developing root systems, this model argued that the presence of different species in the close proximity does not cause an overlap in resource partitioning over space, so that there is no change in resource use with increasing species richness (Cahill, 2003, De Boeck, et al, 2006). This suggestion may be criticised when considering other components in environment such as variability in nutrient supply in space and over time which would induce more complicated responses by organisms since this model only examine one type of spatial complementarity. Indirect stimulation of spatial complementairy such as demonstrated in an experiment by Dimitrakopoulos and Schmid (2004) that increase in soil depth has led to reduce the spatial overlap of rooting system and to increase complementarity irrespective of the change in total soil volume is consistent to the proposed model. Hence robust empirical evidence to support those consequences is needed.
The other probable consequence of aggregation is the impact on competitive interaction and coexistence. Stoll and Prati (2001) found that the growth of superior competitor was suppressed under the intraspecifically aggregated community, but stimulating the performance of inferior species. This can be interpreted as a mechanism to promote coexistence of species and hence, to induce species diversity.
The importance of resource heterogeneity and aggregation has been overlooked in many experiments until recently. As new findings support, those two components in environment are likely to give different aspects in interpreting the results on biodiversity-ecosystem functioning relationship. In nature, environmental conditions are never homogenous while the experimental designs often mislead those factors. In conclusion, it is expected that studies which include the consideration to the impacts of heterogeneity in resource acquisition and aggregation over spatial and temporal scale on ecosystem functioning would be an interesting question in revealing biodiversity effects.
