Nanotechnology is a science combining chemistry and engineering by manipulating materials at atomic level. Nanotechnology is performed on a tiny scale The word nano comes from the Greek word nanos, meaning dwarf. A nanometer is one billionth of a meter (10 -9m) an atom is about 0.1 to 0.2nm in diameter and a human hair is 80,000nm in wide. Nanomaterials are usually about 0.1 to 100 nanometres in size this is not just referring to manmade structures but to those which exist in nature. For example DNA is about 2nm wide and in contrast a red blood cell is 7000nm across.
Nanotechnology is used today in a broad range of applications and has vast potential for improvement of existing technologies for the future. The development of the catalytic converter shows haw nanoscience has already benefited our world by reducing the harmful emissions of our car exhausts. With the use of nanotechnology tiny nanomachines could be developed to travel through the blood stream or lymphatic system to directly target tumours, clear blood clots or close wounds; this would transform surgery making it safer and more effective. Further development of nanoscience in the environmental fields could lead to smaller more efficient batteries and solar cells. Nanotechnology could revolutionaries computing by allowing smaller chips with more capacity and higher efficiency to be built. An example from an article by Ralph C. Merkle entitled "Nanotechnology: It 's a Small, Small, Small, Small World" describes how nanotechnology will enable logic elements to be constructed from just a few atoms, memory storage devices that could hold more than a hundred billion billion bytes will take only the volume of a sugar cube.
Nanoscale engineering involves two different processes one, the traditional method of forming shapes called "top-down" and the new known as "bottom-up". Top-down involves taking your raw material and cutting it down to the size and shape you desire, bottom-up involves taking each atom one by one and placing them together until you achieve the required structure. Bottom-up is a complicated process but it can be made easier as some materials such as nanowires can self assemble, the structures are simple and the atoms (carbon) naturally combine in these specific forms due to bonding preferences. In our cells DNA is reproduced to make new with the aid of proteins, it is hoped that similarly nanomachines may be developed that either self replicate or replicate other existing nanostructures to replace the old.
However, there are some negative aspects to this technology, this is a new science and the past has demonstrated how science can lead in unpredictable and often undesirable directions. Little is known about the toxicological effects of nanoparticles or the effects of these on the natural world, they might react unfavourably with the nanoprocesses already present. It is well known that size especially at the nanoscale effects the physical and chemical properties of a material, for example gold used in glass making will colour the glass blue, red or gold depending on its fineness. Nanomachines would be incredibly tiny often undetectable to the human eye. The largest and most complicated would perhaps be the size of the period at the end of this sentence. Further ideas of nanobots consist of many tiny ones working in a team with swarm intelligence. If they can be programmed for positive use then they could also be programmed for negative, even without the danger of human influence machines can still go wrong, what if we lost control? One famous theoretical nightmare scenario is that proposed by K Eric Drexler in his book Engines of Creation, here he describes the world being eaten up by self replicating nanobots until all that is left is a sort of grey-goo.
This essay will focus on the importance of nanotechnology for the skiing sector of the public it will evaluate the knowledge of this sector with regards to nanotechnology. Nanotechnology is especially useful to the skiing community in the field of materials due to its use in clothing, skiwax and sunscreen. At professional level the diet of a sports person is important, the use of nanotechnology for the improvement of food nutritional value and flavour may become useful in the future. All people need medical care; consequently the advancing of medicine through the use of nanotechnology is beneficial to this group and justifies the huge investment in this line of research.
Sunscreens are important for skiers as snow magnifies the strength of the suns rays due to its refractive and reflective properties. Nucelle a cosmetics company markets a sunscreen which contains nanoparticles of zinc oxide which absorb both UVA and UVB rays. The particles are invisible to the naked eye consequently, instead of the traditional thick white cream associated with SPF 's of 30+ the lotion is easily absorbed into the skin leaving no white residue.
If nanoparticles are combined with normal fibres they can dramatically alter the macroscopic properties of that material. This is already being implemented in clothing. Silver particles have been woven into socks as to reduce foot odour. In trousers and shirts molecular structures have been attached to the cotton fibres, these form barriers that causes liquids and stains to bead up on the surface and prevent absorption and they are wrinkle-proof. Ski jacket manufacturers have used nanotechnology to make a two-layer laminate that causes the jackets to be windproof, waterproof, breathable and dirt resistant.
Waxing of ski 's is an old practice which increases the smooth run of the ski over snow and reduces the likelihood of snow sticking to the bottom. Over the years technology has increased the effectiveness of ski waxes and the era of synthetics has accelerated this process. However, the birth of nanotechnology has outpaced past developments with a new type of wax containing nanoparticles. Developed by Nanogate and marketed under the label Cerax Naowax it provides a long lasting, hard surface which remains free from build up. It consists of both adhesive and non-adhesive particles combined with binding nanoparticles dissolved in a solvent. When applied the particles organise themselves as the solvent evaporates, the adhesive particles gravitate to the surface of the ski and the non-adhesive particles to the outside, the nanoparticles bind the two layers together and this results in a thin protective film that is both hydrophobic and oleophobic.
Nanotechnology has vast implications for the food industry; it is proposed that food products could be designed from scratch. This would allow personalised meals to be made combining necessary nutrient content with a flavour matched to your taste buds. Companies such as Heinz, Kraft and Nestle are researching the possibilities into flavour improvement and nutrient supplementation. Biolit Nanotechnology a Russian company, market health and beauty products, their latest venture is into nano-encapsulation techniques. This involves encasing a compound for example natural plant extract into a nano- or micro-sphere, a change in environmental conditions such as pH or temperature will trigger the release of the compound from the sphere. Encapsulation has huge potential, it prolongs shelf life and eliminates the need for preservatives, additionally it increases absorption of the product by the body and allows a more targeted delivery.
An article at Food and Drink Europe.com descries how nanotechnology could be used to improve food packaging to avoid spoilage of food during shipment and while on the shelf by protecting it from external influences. Enhanced mechanical and thermal properties would increase barrier properties such as heat resistance. Additionally smart surfaces with antifungal and microbic properties could be developed to fight bacteria and also sense and signal when the food is going off. Already nanoparticles such as titanium dioxide and silica are being used in food packaging.
Much has been communicated to the public on the subject of nanotechnology but most on the future possibilities of this technology and less on how and where it is implemented today. Nanotechnology has potential for many disciplines however the areas that have received the largest media attention and therefore have been most communicated are those of medicine, computers and general mechanical devices like those observed in nature. This communication has occurred in many forms including newspapers, TV, books, via the internet, and in magazines.
Different media are aimed at different sectors of the public and therefore it is natural that the skiing community will have obtained more knowledge from some sources than from others. Since this sector is an international sector of the public it is reasonable to assume that newspapers which tend to be based in one country or region will not be so effective for the communication of nanotechnology. The newspaper industry is a business, the companies need to sell papers and therefore only print stories that are newsworthy, that will sell because they are of public interest. Consequentially one expects much hype and exaggeration of the issues especially in situations involving risk as a public threatened will want to read all about it. Television reaches a larger audience but again it is usually based in one country or in one language, however it has the advantage of being able to present the topic with great depth. Most books written on this subject take a futuristic approach and speculate about the possibilities and risks of nanotechnology. Books are usually written due to the whim of the author or for the pleasure of all interested parties. Factual text books are written on the basis of research and therefore should contain accurate information (at the date of publication) and fiction, sci-fi in this case often blends fact and fantasy to the authors own preference and therefore may lead to misconception on the part of the public. The internet is a public media, it is open to contribution by all regardless of location. As well as sites published by those with an interest in the subject there are also many specialist sites available to the public from organisations such as the Institute of Physics and the Royal Society of Science.
One of the main objectives of nanotechnology is too design and build machines for specific purposes. Let us consider the natural systems of call replication, in this process, each organism in the cell is copied effectively doubling the cell biomass before it divides into two daughter cells. The hope of science is to develop the ability to build machines that can build others from scratch by taking atoms and combining them in the desired order and position. A further development would be self replicating machines. The 1950 's and 80 's saw brief bursts of research activity in this area, now with the dawn of nanotechnology a revival has occurred and new research is being conducted. Nanomachines would range from tiny cogs and gears placed together to perform simple functions in larger machines such as computers to systems of machines on the scale of bacteria that would act as factories for producing other nanomachines.
The lithoguru at describes how computer chips are made using lithography (Greek lithos (stones) and graphia (to write) meaning writing on stones). This involves printing films of conductors (e.g. copper) and insulators (e.g. silicon dioxide) onto a semiconductor substrate usually of silicon to build up switches and circuit boards. However, advances in computer technology involving size reduction of components is limited by this method. Moore 's law is a law which describes the rate of the advance of computer technology, it states that computer power doubles roughly every 18 months and this has been true for 40 years. It is estimated that the limit of silicon chip technology will be reached within 15 years. Although predictions of this sort in the past have been wrong it is to be noted that size reduction by whatever means will result increased nanodesigns. The use of nanotechnology in computers will allow them to be smaller, lighter, stronger, faster, cheaper to build and more precise.
The TV program Horizon has tackled the communication of nanotechnology with the recent (2001) incident concerning Jan Hendrik Sch  n a scientist who faked his research into nanotechnology by claiming to have made a computer transistor out of a single organic molecule. This threw the scientific community into a turmoil of excitement as it would have solved the problem of the end of Moore 's law (with no more further development of chips possible economic growth will stagnate).The program gave an extremely accurate description of the possibilities of nanotechnology in many fields especially that of computing it also considered the impacts, both positive and negative of nanotechnology could have. A quote from the transcript found on the BBC web pages puts this aptly "A world where disease could be destroyed before the first symptoms appear..... it could also be a world where the darkest evil could be unleashed.".
The use of nanotechnology in medicine is at stages of both research and use . recent article in the Guardian newspaper entitled "Nanotechnology restores hamsters' sight" describes how scientists did just that. Incisions in the brain tissue of the animals which caused sight loss were healed by injecting a scaffold solution of nanoparticles into the area. The severed nerve cells grew through the scaffold and after 6 weeks 75% of the animals had regained their sight. The researchers believe that it could be used in humans within five years to reduce scaring of severed nerve ends. The article was to the point and interesting (which is why I read it) the communication was at a level suitable for all, the jargon was minimal and where used was also explained. An article in the New Scientist by Zeeya Merali demonstrates the future possibilities of nanotechnology in medicine, scientists discovered that when a red blood cell is subjected to laser it spins. This could be used as a motor to power a nanomachine and could help diagnose malaria, measure molecules, or clear congested arteries. Vivienne Parry writing in the Times newspaper describes how even now nanotechnology is used in medicine to fight diseases such as ovarian and breast cancer. The delivery of the ovarian cancer drug Doxil involves the use of liposomes, the drug is contained within the nano-sized hollow spheres of fat which dissolve on contact with the cell wall and this results in a more targeted delivery of the medicine.
E. Drexlers book Engines of Creation is of the popular science genre and it tackles the topic of nanotechnology with zeal. It considers the depth and width of this subject in almost every field at both the present and the future. For example the subject of nanotechnology in medicine is well communicated. Disease and the aging process are described as "... the result of a disarrangement of atoms in the body..." nanotechnology will allow us to put our atoms back in their correct positions as a method of healing and reviving youth. On a more basic and realistic level nanotechnology will enable the direct targeting of diseases such as cancer by placing drugs in tiny machines able to travel through the body to the correct site. This futuristic approach is following theoretical speculation based on how present day technologies may evolve. The writing was clear but often exaggerated and some things where said twice or thrice, the detail was such that I believe nothing was forgotten. The book was written in 1990, due to advances in nanotechnology some of the information is now outdated.
In order to evaluate the effectiveness of science communication in the field of nanotechnology, I will question two skiers to discover what they know; nanotechnology is important to the skiing community for the afore mentioned reasons and therefore they should have some knowledge of this topic. The contributions from both participants are combined and simplified. Not all questions are included and answers are included.
What is nanotechnology? The technology of nano...things. Of small things. Ultra ultra small technology. The technology of atoms.
How small? Very very very small. Micro micro. The scale of atoms.
How is it used today? Do n't know. In car wax.
What possibilities does nanotechnology have for the future and in which areas may it prove usefull? We could redesign ourselves to live in frozen environments or deserts, superhumans. Artificial intelligence but it would be organic so technically it would be life. It would be really good for medicine and chemistry. In medicine they are trying to reduce invasive surgery by doing keyhole, well this would be better than that there would be no cut at all just a hole for the injection and the all the tiny machines could do their work. It would be useful for lots of things like the environment and food oh and maybe computers.
From where did you acquire this knowledge? TV, A series on sky1 called What we Still Do n't Know it had a lot about the nature of life and our control over the things we create today our machines are limited by the physical restraints of electricity but nanotechnology would not have that problem. This computer game Deus Ex it was the 1997 game of the year. It is set in a future globalised world, where genetic engineering is normal and people are grown in tanks with the aid of nanotechnology, a virus like grey-goo is killing people and basically you have to save the world.. My father-in-law; he uses the wax on his car.
Their general understanding of nanotechnology is low, the interviewees know the meaning of the word but do not understand how this applicable to the real world and they do n't know what is involved i.e. the building of structures. Their knowledge consists of a variety of facts, they do not have a basic understanding of this topic, rather a large amount of knowledge in one or two particular areas.
The answers to the initial questions demonstrate qualitative knowledge but no quantitative knowledge.They know that nanotechnology is applicable to many fields such as medicine and food but do not know how it is applicable to their own sport. Nanotechnology is present in over 200 products yet these two could only name one between them this indicates poor communication of this topic. Interestingly they only connected nanotechnology with computers as an afterthought when this is one of the fields in which nanotechnology could have the largest impact.
The understanding seamed to be focused in two separate areas one on the integration of nanotechnology with certain products and one that considers nanotechnology as its own science concerned with the development of artificial intelligence. Both have an understanding of the philosophical questions that nanotechnology raises about the nature of life and artificial intelligence They know that nanotechnology could have great impact in the future and much of their knowledge is based in science fiction, but as much of nanotechnology is still at the research and science fiction state this is reasonable.
Their knowledge was obtained from a variety of sources, computer games, TV and Word of mouth. Both TV and computer games will have large audiences. TV is clearly the most effective form of communication as the interviewee who saw the program had the most relevant knowledge of nanotechnology. The car wax demonstrates the importance of communication by word of mouth, additionally it shows that in order for somebody to want to learn they must first be curios and interested.
The field of nanotechnology is very large as it has significance for so many fields much has been communicated to the public but most on the possibilities of this technology and less on how and where it is implemented today. In many ways it is very much still in the development stage yet its use in many products on the supermarket shelves such as sunscreen and food packaging make it essential that the public have some knowledge of this exciting new technology. Nanotechnology has been extensively communicated to the public. This has occurred through many different media and with many different formats and approaches. However very little has been received by the public as public knowledge is minimal and erratic, this means that the communication of this topic has not been particularly successful. Answers also demonstrate the public feeling that nanotechnology is a new thing and will only impact in the future, the knowledge that it is being used today and has enhanced products already on the market is surprising.
Consequently in order to raise awareness of this issue and to increase the general science knowledge of the public more effective communication must occur. This is especially important as this science carries possible risks for all of mankind and additionally some of the public have obtained false knowledge about nanotechnology and this should not occur. The articles and programs designed for communication of nanotechnology are well presented and structures with good scientific content pitched at an appropriate level. However as the public has obviously not been affected by this is necessary to improve the situation with more articles etc or to ensure that those published reach a larger audience. The media published must be interesting and relevant for the intended audience and this audience must be as large as possible.
