Leckford Estate, Hampshire is a busy 4000 acre farming estate comprising of many enterprises including a dairy, mushroom farm, fruit farm and a broiler chicken enterprise. The estate is run by the John Lewis Partnership and therefore linked to Waitrose, providing fresh food throughout the seasons exclusively to the supermarket. Due to the estate producing primarily for Waitrose it is very important that it works closely to the retail outlet and links products with consumers, it is also very important that it meets all of its objectives and all enterprises are managed carefully to ensure effective productivity is maintained.
Leckford is unique being the only estate run and owned by a large retail outlet. The estate was set up by John Speden Lewis over 75years ago, with its original vision being 'farming in harmony with the environment as well as to share in the values that Waitrose continues to hold true in its everyday expertise in food (Leckford Estate 2006). Due to the estate being owned by the retail outlet it sees even greater than traditional farms the importance of linking products and consumers. It achieves this in a variety of ways, through instore schemes, open days for John Lewis cardholders, and promotions such as leaflets.
The instore schemes such as Waitrose Select Farm schemes promote the farmer on each product. The information on the packaging gives detailed information about where the product has come from and in the case of Leckford products promotes the image of produced on Waitroses 'Home Farm'. This would give confidence to the buyer through being able to associate where the product has come from and that it has been grown to Waitrose standards. Other ways in which Leckford and Waitrose link consumers and products are through providing instore leaflets and open days giving detailed information about the farm, all its enterprises, standards and the products that are produced. These give consumers more information about the products that they are buying, and are unique to Waitrose that other supermarkets do not do. This would appeal to customers and again give confidence to consumers about the products. All these methods that are used to link products with customers are very important to Waitrose and Leckford. It promotes Leckford Estate products and therefore increases sales and demand for them. It also promotes Waitroses image that they are concerned with the way in which the food they sell is produced and want to be linked to farming through having their own farm. Which other supermarkets do not have.
There are 250 employees at Leckford Estate, 75 staff in the mushroom enterprise alone and therefore management of all the enterprises and staffs is vitally important. The management structure consists of managers of each enterprise with a working team. Each manager of each enterprise consults with the general agricultural manager or commercial manager and then they consult with board directors from Waitrose and John Lewis. This shows that there are many layers in the management system and therefore links of communication are vitally important along with monitoring controls in place. Meetings take place regularly in order to keep all staff informed, meetings between enterprise managers and their team members take place daily to assert tasks, meetings between enterprise managers and general managers ensure that objectives and budgets are on track, and board meetings take place regularly to discuss changes and short term or long term improvements along with finances. The large number of meetings not only within the estate but with committees and Waitrose, do have some negative effects, it takes along time for decisions to be made, as everything has to be discussed and approved.
Management of employees and the estate as shown above is important to achieve the estate objectives. The estate objectives are:
The primary motivation factor is through the unique John Lewis Partnership scheme, making all workers partners. This motivates the staff to be as productive as possible, as at the end of each financial year a certain amount of the profit made by the company is split between all partners as a percentage of their wages. This not only makes an advantage to the estate productivity but also to the staff turnover, which is low. There is however a disadvantage to this as it can lead to an aging work force, with no new ideas, and no young skills coming into the company. All staff are kept well informed through papers such as the Leckford Chronicle, with reports on each enterprise, they are also invited to be different committee members and attend social events. Annual reviews take place to monitor success and any problems. From visiting the estate it seems that currently they are meeting their objective of ensuring staff motivation and welfare quite positively. A small improvement that could be made to meet this objective even more is through allowing staff to make some smaller decisions at hand in the areas that they work. Currently it seems quite difficult due to the long communication and decision-making chain, along with needing to be on staff committees for staff to make any decisions about the running of the enterprise in which they work. Allowing this adjustment will improve motivation, as staff will feel they are having their own input and not having to wait a lengthy period of time for small decisions to be agreed.
Protection of the environment is one of the key objectives highlighted at Leckford Estate. The land is in Countryside Stewardship and the estate is a member of Linking Environment And Farming (LEAF), as a demonstration farm.
Being apart of LEAF not only protects the environment but also addresses the current increasing consumer concerns, which are no longer just purchasing the products on the shelves but 'consumers are more aware of the environmental implications of their actions, and it has shown from surveys that people will be asking more and more for green products when shopping (The Institute Of Grocery Distribution 1990). This fits in well with linking products with consumers.
Other ways in which they are meeting the objective is through promoting the full cycle of growth and production from the land and back again. Such as the two examples of cycles shown below.
These show that not only are Leckford looking to produce products such as the chicken or mushrooms, but also they are thinking wholly about the environment in which they are working. Every step has a role in the chain and the estate is not just taking from the environment but they are adding to it in return. Such as with the chicken muck, and compost spreading back onto the land. This is showing that they are protecting the land for future generations. There are however areas where Leckford do not seem to be meeting this objective in protecting the environment. This is through the movement of the fruit processing which is no longer on the estate but in Kent. This means that the fruit is travelling to Kent for packing and then to the supermarket or farm shop on the estate where it is sold. This is adding to food miles and not looking after the environment. Another way in which they could be seen to be not protecting the environment is through building the new dairy to house 600 dairy cows. This high number of animals could mean that animal welfare is compromised due to the sheer volume of cows in one herd and therefore making it harder to notice changes in individual cow health. Improvements that could be made could be to become a member of Integrated Crop Management. This would mean not prophylactic spraying or fertilising, instead monitoring and planning controls such as biological controls. This would benefit the environment and could be used as an extra selling point to customers.
The analysis in the way that Leckford connect their products with consumers has shown previously in the report. It has shown to be effective in providing customers with information about the product, not only giving them confidence in what they are buying but also giving them a feeling of connection to the farmer and by buying products that have been grown by Waitroses own farm, that are LEAF and environmentally friendly and not those that are intensively produced, they are helping towards protecting the environment. Other ways in which Leckford could meet this objective more and connect products with consumers would be to promote their own farm shop more. It seemed to be quite hidden away and not promoted or displayed well with a range of the products produced. It could be more central to the estate with easy access and promotion of all products produced. This shop would be a good opportunity to connect with consumers tell them about the products produced and therefore portray a good image and customer base that could soon spread.
Producing quality products is what Waitrose customers want and is well known for. Diagram 1 shows the market positions for food formats and Waitrose does not lie with the conventional supermarkets but near the food hall, with a wide range of produce at a higher price that conventional supermarkets. It is therefore important that Leckford produce these high quality products and ensures that they reach and are sold in the supermarket to maintain this market position of which it is well known for.
One of the key ways in achieving quality products at Leckford is through producing traditional food that suits the ground and estate conditions. Traditional varieties are grown such as Coxes apples and Conference pears, traditional breeds of chicken are used. This means that the products grow better due to being native and therefore a higher quality product is achieved at the end. Also at every step quality is considered, through planting, harvesting and storing. The products such as the mushrooms are aimed to be on the supermarket shelf within 24hours of picking and therefore this ensures the quality of product. 'At Waitrose our reputation rests on the undistributed traceability of the finest foods (Leckford Estate 2006). At Leckford they do seem to be meeting this objective well, but it is key that they remain focused at keeping quality throughout each step to ensure their products keep their quality.
It is important for the estate to make a profit in order to be a successful business in its own right. For this reason each enterprise is carefully monitored between the enterprise manager and the general manager comparing sales and prices received to last year and careful setting budgets. This allows them to react quickly to increasing costs or opportunities.
The broiler production enterprise seemed to be making a good profit. Prices for their chicken in Waitrose are   4.49/kg compared to normal chicken at   2.89/kg (Waitrose 2006). This shows that the chicken Leckford produce make nearly double the price of intensively produced chicken. This meant that last year the chicken enterprise at Leckford made a profit of thirty thousand pounds and therefore successfully met this objective.
Not all enterprises met the objective however and therefore a way in which this could be improved upon could be to get rid of the mushroom farm. It was shown that due to the reduction in prices at other supermarkets and consequently Waitrose this enterprise has not made a profit for the last two years. It has also shown that it has high competition from abroad. This means that it is not commercially viable to keep the enterprise, and any straw that is used in the compost could be sold adding to income.
It has shown that running a large estate, with a high work force and being closely linked to Waitrose is complex. It is important that every member of staff communicates, knows where within the management system they lie and therefore who to directly communicate with. Each enterprise is carefully monitored, compared to the budget, compared to last years performance and discussed at board meetings about short term and long term plans for each enterprise. Staff performance is also closely monitored with yearly appraisals. Being owned by a retail outlet highlights the need for linking product with consumer and this is achieved through open days and in store schemes. Even though the running of the estate is complex they do however seem to be meeting most of its objectives positively. All objectives seem to link in together, such as protecting the environment not only helps to produce quality products but also adds to linking customers with products through being a demonstration farm. Ensuring staff welfare also adds to producing quality products. This linkage aids in being able to achieve the objectives.
