A program was written to discover whether the atomic structure of melt-spun amorphous Dy7Ni3 could be modelled by a random atomic packing, with the nickel atoms forced apart to the minimum distance found experimentally. The program was based on the Metropolis Monte Carlo method and used the Lennard-Jones potential. Program results with nickel contacts permitted were checked against Percus-Yevick data, confirming that the program was working correctly. Data from the generated structure with nickel contacts prevented was very similar to the experimental results, but did not give a close enough match to represent a possible structure. No common atomic configurations could be found in the generated structure; the atoms appeared to be randomly arranged. Using the correct radius ratio, a spherically symmetric potential and forcing the nickel atoms apart is therefore not sufficient to find a possible structure; it appears that a more sophisticated potential involving directionality is required.
A study of the atomic and magnetic structure of melt-spun amorphous Dy 7Ni 3 was carried out by Alex Hannon in 1991.1 It may initially be thought that the structure of an amorphous material could be modelled by a random atomic packing; however, it was found that there were no Ni-Ni contacts in the material, which would not be expected from such a model. A more ordered structural model is therefore needed which takes this into account.
The aim of this project was to discover whether a possible atomic structure for melt-spun amorphous Dy 7Ni 3 could be found using a model based on a random atomic packing, with a spherically symmetric potential, but including forcing the nickel atoms apart to the minimum distance found in the above experiment; or whether further modifications to this model would be needed to find a structure. The topic is of interest because rare earth-transition metal glasses such as this have been studied little 1, and the structure of this material is still not understood.
Amorphous metals were first discovered in 1959 by Duwez and associates 2,3, who formed glassy alloys by quenching mixtures of liquid metals. Since then many different amorphous metals (also called metallic glasses if they have been cooled from the liquid state 4) have been created. The liquid metal must be cooled very rapidly to prevent crystallisation. In the melt-spinning technique, this is done by a jet of molten metal hitting a rapidly rotating copper wheel; it is cooled at a rate of around 10 6 K s -1, producing a very thin ribbon of metallic glass.2.
Amorphous metals were the focus of considerable interest during the late 1970s and 1980s 4, because of their unusual physical properties: they are hard, ductile, not brittle and are relatively good electrical conductors 3. Despite this, they have not yet found widespread practical application; the reasons for this include problems with cost and the difficulty of producing bulk blocks of the material. However, amorphous metals may yet be put to wider use, and the field is still one of interest which is not fully understood.
X-ray and neutron diffraction are used to study the structure of amorphous metals.5 The number of neighbours to an atom between distances r and r+dr is given by the radial distribution function, g(r): (1) where (r) is the average number density of relevant atoms at a distance r from any atom randomly chosen as the origin.3,5 This gives a one-dimensional representation of the structure, with broad peaks indicating the positions of, and numbers of atoms in, shells of atoms surrounding any given atom. Diffraction data is generally analysed using the partial correlation function for particular combinations of atoms, t(r): (2) because in this function the experimental broadening is independent of r.5 As the experimental data is one-dimensional it is impossible to find a conclusive three-dimensional structure, but a possible structure may be found.5.
These studies have shown that metallic glasses are very densely packed, and that they have a higher degree of short-range order than liquids; this is shown by the second peaks of the radial distribution or correlation functions splitting into two  'shoulders'.3,6 Studies of metal-metalloid glasses have shown that metalloid-metalloid nearest neighbours do not occur, as would be expected in a dense random packing structure.7 An equivalent feature was found by Hannon 's experiment, with no contact between transition metal atoms. One suggestion for the structure of amorphous Dy 7Ni 3 is that the dysprosium atoms may be arranged in trigonal prisms, as occurs in the crystal form of dysprosium nickel 8. Trigonal prisms also occur in many transition metal-metalloid glasses 7, and the radius ratio of nickel and dysprosium atoms suggests formation of trigonal prisms 5. If trigonal prisms were present, the nickel atoms would be in the centres of the prisms, and hence not in contact with each other.
A program was written in fortran 95 to try to find a possible structure for melt-spun amorphous Dy 7Ni 3. The finished program used for many of the program runs is shown in Appendix A. The program was initially run with contacts between all atoms permitted. Data from this model could be compared with the Percus-Yevick data 1 for a random packing of hard spheres, allowing the program results to be checked independently of the experimental data. The program was then adapted to prevent contact between nickel atoms.
In the program, atoms were placed in a 'box', of size determined by the density of the material (0.03938 atoms   -3)1. The atoms were then moved around the box using the Metropolis Monte Carlo method (see below), to attempt to find the arrangement with the lowest total potential energy.
The interatomic potential energy (r) between any two atoms was calculated using the Lennard-Jones potential: (3) where is the separation distance at which = 0; is the lowest value of the potential energy, or the maximum potential well depth; and r is the distance between the centres of the atoms.
The Lennard-Jones potential is a very approximate representation of a complex system. It considers the forces between a pair of neutral atoms in isolation, which does not take into account distortions from the other atoms, and from the electron cloud. This meant that the parameters could need to be optimised so that the results produced by the simulation were as similar as possible to those found experimentally. The potential well depth was initially approximated by = 2 eV, and was taken to be the sum of the hard-sphere radii of the atoms in question: r Dy = 1.6735    and r Ni = 0.969   .1.
The Lennard-Jones potential tends to 0 relatively rapidly with distance r. A program was written to calculate the Lennard-Jones potentials for the three combinations of atom types (Appendix B); a graph of the results is shown in Figure 1. A potential cut-off of r max = 9    was chosen, as all three potentials appeared to have reduced to negligible amounts by this point. The potential energy of an atom was approximated as the sum of the potential energies between that atom and all other atoms within a distance r max.
In order to prevent boundary effects distorting the model, the main box was surrounded by 26 'ghost' boxes. Each ghost box was the same size as the main box, and contained ghost atoms at the same relative co-ordinates as the atoms in the main box. When an atom in the main box was moved, its 26 corresponding ghost atoms also moved in exactly the same way. In calculating the potential energy of an atom, both main and ghost atoms within a distance r max were taken into account. All the atoms in the main box were therefore surrounded by approximately the same density of atoms, so that boundary effects did not occur. To prevent atoms moving out of the main box, periodic boundary conditions were imposed: when a movewould have lead to an atom being outside the main box, it was transferred to the equivalent position at the opposite side of the box.
The Metropolis Monte Carlo method was used to decide whether a particular move should be accepted. An atom was selected at random, and assigned a possible new position using random fractions of the maximum step length, . The difference in potential energy of the atom between the new and old positions, , was then calculated. If  0, a random number was generated between 0 and 1, and compared to exp(-/k BT), where k B is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature of the material, initially taken to be room temperature (298 K). If the exponential was greater than the random number the move was accepted; if not, it was rejected. This method tends to reject moves which result in a large increase in potential energy, but accept those resulting in only a small increase. This gives the opportunity to escape from any local minima which may occur.9 The method is summarised in Figure 2. The optimum value of gives an acceptance of 50%; when parameters in the potential were altered, was also altered to maintain this acceptance.
This process was placed in a loop so that it could be repeated many times. The total potential energy of the system, tot, was found by summing the potentials between all the pairs of atoms in the main box, and pairs of one atom in the main box and one in a ghost box. The lower the value of tot, the more stable the system. At regular intervals tot was calculated so that its variation could be monitored.
At the end of each program run, histograms of the radial distribution functions were produced. These histograms could be compared with the Percus-Yevick or experimental data. For exact comparison, the program unitan was used to convert the histograms to partial correlation functions, and incorporate experimental resolution and thermal broadening. For data to be processed by unitan the program was adapted to produce ten sets of histograms at intervals of 500,000 loops, and take the average. Using a time average in this way gave equivalent results to using a space average over a larger system.
An error was later discovered in the method used to calculate the radial distribution functions and tot, which means that the graphs in Figures 3-5 shown below are inaccurate by a scale factor. The trends of the graphs are correct and this did not affect the overall running of the program.
It was planned to place the atoms randomly in the box, but this resulted in some pairs of atoms being too close together for the potentials to be manageable. To solve this problem, programs were written to place 100 atoms randomly in a box (Appendix C), and to calculate the distances between each pair of atoms (Appendix D). Atoms were then moved manually until all the atoms were far enough apart for the calculations to be possible.
The main program was run from these co-ordinates over 100,000 loops. As expected, the potential energy initially reduced sharply as atoms which were very close together moved further apart (Figure 3). This more stable configuration was used as a basis for systems with increased numbers of atoms, formed by arranging replicas of the original box to create larger cubes. A box containing 2700 atoms was the largest system which could be run at a reasonable speed, so this number of atoms was used for the remainder of the project. With this box size the program ran at a rate of approximately half a million loops per hour.
Histograms of the radial distribution functions after 1000 program loops of this system (Figure 4) show sharp peaks at 13.6    in the Dy-Dy and Ni-Ni curves. The original box of 100 atoms was of side length 13.6   , so the atomic arrangements repeated after this distance. The program was run over approximately 35 million loops until the peak disappeared; it was then thought that the repeating structure had been lost.
The Dy-Dy histogram produced at this stage (Figure 5) shows a sharp peak just before 9   , and a sharp trough at 9   , with the rest of the curve apparently unaffected. Various tests confirmed that this was a genuine property of the co-ordinates. It appears that the potential cut-off of r max = 9    was too low, leading to some atoms at the cut-off distance being drawn into just inside that distance, giving a lower potential energy and therefore more stable arrangement. This effect showed most clearly on the Dy-Dy histogram because the Dy-Dy potential well occurs at a greater distance r than the Dy-Ni or Ni-Ni potential wells. rmax was increased to 20    to ensure that the effect was negligible.
The program was run until the total potential energy dropped only very gradually. The program was then adapted so that it modelled a system with the nickel atoms forced apart to a minimum distance of 2.481    (Appendix E), and run further until the potential energy had settled. The histograms of the partial correlation functions processed by unitan for the two models gave good matches to the Percus-Yevick and experimental data as appropriate (Figure 6). The widths of the initial peaks of the histograms closely matched the experimental data, so the values used for did not need to be optimised. These peaks were slightly too sharp, so the program with nickel contacts prevented was re-run with reduced in stages from 2 to 0.05 eV. Despite making such dramatic changes in well depth, the heights of the first peaks reduced only very gradually. This showed that is not a critical parameter.
The program Chem3D was studied, and adapted so that it could be used to model the generated structures. A program was written to convert the co-ordinate files into a format which could be read by Chem3D (Appendix F), and images were produced of both models (Figure 7). The image of the system with nickel contacts permitted shows an approximate repeating structure; this can also be seen, slightly less clearly, in the image of the system with nickel contacts prevented.
The original structure from the box of 100 atoms was therefore still present, despite the disappearance of the peak in the histograms at the original box side length of 13.6   . It appears that this peak had in fact spread out as the atoms moved small distances, so that the exact repeating structure was lost, but the overall pattern remained. This explained the low hump at around 13.6    which had been observed on the Ni-Ni histograms (Figure 6). The system had effectively been 'frozen', with the temperature too low for significant atomic movement to occur. To allow the atoms to move more freely, both models needed to be 'heated' to melting point, allowed to run at a high temperature, and then 'quenched' by gradually reducing the temperature back to room temperature.
The equations used meant that decreasing and increasing the temperature were equivalent. It was decided to continue changing as this was the variable which had been altered previously. Another program was written to calculate the average distances moved by dysprosium and nickel atoms during a program run (Appendix G), and more runs carried out with further reduced. The program results showed a very steep increase in the average distance moved below = 0.1 eV, corresponding to a melting point (Figure 8). For both systems, was reduced to 0.005 eV, so that the average distances moved were comparable to the original box size. Figure 9 shows the histograms of the partial correlation functions of the systems at this point. The broadening of the peaks and the loss of structural detail including the  'shoulders' in the second peaks shows that the material was in a liquid state. Figure 10 shows the corresponding Chem3D images of the systems; the repeating structure is no longer visible.
The systems were then quenched by gradually increasing the well depth at intervals during the program runs. Two sets of final results were produced for each system, with = 0.2 eV and = 1 eV (Figures 11 and 12), so that any effects due to the magnitude of the well depth could be observed.
Figure 11 shows that there is very good correlation between the Percus-Yevick model and the generated structure with nickel contacts permitted, to well within the accuracy which could be expected in comparing a system of soft potentials with a close packing of hard spheres. The sharper first peaks in the histograms of the generated structure are due to the atoms tending to stay at a well-defined distance from each other as a result of the potential well, which is not present in the Percus-Yevick model. Increasing the potential well depth sharpens the peaks and gives a slightly more detailed structure, as the atoms become less likely to move from the potential well. These graphs give confirmation, independently of the experimental results, that the program was working effectively.
Figure 12 shows that the histograms of the generated structure with nickel contacts prevented are very similar to the experimental results. However, the Dy-Dy and Ni-Ni graphs do not provide a close enough match to represent a possible structure. It therefore appears that the methods used were not sufficient to find a possible structure.
This generated structure could represent a perturbation of the actual structure, and could contain similar structural effects. The structure was analysed to find whether trigonal prisms, or any other structural forms, were present. The model with = 1 eV was used because the greater well depth reduces the size of thermal vibrations away from the underlying structure. A program was written to identify nickel atoms which had six dysprosium atoms around them within a distance of 3.65    - the distance of the outer edge of the first peak of the Dy-Ni radial distribution function (Appendix H). Some of these groups of atoms were displayed on Chem3D; each group appeared to be randomly distributed, and no trigonal prisms were observed. Another program was written to find the Dy-Ni-Dy angles in these groups of atoms (Appendix I). A small number of results are shown in Table I. The results show that the dysprosium atoms in these clusters do not form octahedra, because the required three 180 angles are not present. The number of angles near to 81.8 suggests that triangular faces do occur.
However, these clusters of atoms only represent 154 of the 810 nickel atoms in the model. Another program was written to produce a table of the numbers of nickel and dysprosium atoms within 3.65    of nickel atoms (Appendix J). This was adapted to give the same data within 4.35    of dysprosium atoms (the distance of the outer edge of the first peak of the Dy-Dy radial distribution function). The results (Tables II and III) show a broad distribution of co-ordination numbers for both nickel and dysprosium. There is no highly favoured configuration; the atoms appear to be arranged in a random distribution.
Histograms of the total co-ordination numbers around nickel and dysprosium atoms are shown in Figures 13 and 14. Figure 14 appears to show a discontinuity between co-ordination numbers of 9 and 10; Figure 13 has a similar shape although the values do not decrease in the same way. The error bars show that the discontinuity is on the borderline of the error boundaries, and may not be a real effect. It is difficult to draw any further conclusions from this model; a study of a larger system could reveal whether or not this pattern is a true property of the atomic co-ordinates.
The histograms of the partial correlation functions of the generated structures were then compared to appropriately scaled data for a Finney random packing (Figure 15). Finney studied the random packing of a single size of sphere. Polk suggested that in a transition metal-metalloid glass, the transition metal atoms could be arranged in a Finney random packing, with the smaller metalloid atoms inserted in the holes formed in this structure.5,10 It was initially thought that the structures generated here may be similar to Polk 's model, but Figure 15 shows that there is no significant similarity. It therefore appears that the presence of the nickel atoms does affect the arrangements of the dysprosium atoms; the assumed passivity of the smaller atoms is the main problem with Polk 's model.5.
The aim of this project was to discover whether the atomic structure of melt-spun amorphous Dy 7Ni 3 could be modelled by a random atomic packing based on a spherically symmetric potential, with the nickel atoms forced apart to the distance found experimentally. This model was produced and studied, but it did not give a close enough match to the experimental data to represent a possible structure. The structure of the crystalline form of the material, and the radius ratio of the atoms, suggests that trigonal prisms may be present in amorphous Dy 7Ni 3. However, no particular structural configurations could be found in the model; it appeared to represent a random distribution of atoms.
This shows that using the correct radius ratio, a spherically symmetric potential and forcing the nickel atoms apart is not sufficient to find a structure for amorphous Dy 7Ni 3. It appears that any minor alterations to a spherically symmetric potential would not be sufficient to model the structure; the results and analysis of the model imply very strongly that a more sophisticated potential is needed. Some directionality would need to be introduced into the potential to give a bias towards specific local environments. Using such a potential, it may be possible to produce a model of a possible structure, in which trigonal prisms, or some other structural units, may be found.
