A rare breed of animal is a species of animal that is uncommon or listed as being at risk. The risk of a breed of animal can be determined by the total number of breeding males or females that are still in existence.
The table below shows the criteria for determining breeds at risk.
Breeds of animals may become rare or extinct for a variety of reasons. A move towards more intensive farming practices has meant that some breeds which did not suit these techniques have declined in numbers. Some breeders may decide that it is no longer financially viable to continue breeding certain breeds. This may be because demand for the product has decreased and so may therefore contribute to a decline in the breed.
The Gloucestershire Old Spots Pig (also commonly known as the orchard pig or the Cottagers pig) is an example of a rare breed of pig in the UK. The Gloucestershire Old spots are the first breed of pig to be registered as a pedigree back in 1913, thus making it the oldest breed! This breed is one of seven British breeds of pig recognised by the Rare Breeds Survival Trust (RBST). A breed of pig is recognised as being at risk by the RBST if there are fewer than 1000 registered adult females in population.
The Gloucestershire Old spots originated from the area around the Berkeley Vale in the South West of England. It is thought that the Gloucestershire Old spot is the outcome of the crossing of a Gloucestershire pig and a Berkshire pig. The Gloucestershire Old spots are a large breed of lop eared pig. It is of a white colour and has a minimum of one black spot.
Genetic diversity is an important element in reducing the number of rare breeds of animals because it means that the animals become more adaptable to a variety of environments and may also help to reduce any potential risk the breed may be particularly vulnerable to. It is important to keep the gene pool functioning, because in the future the world environment and climate is likely to change and therefore we are unable to predict how certain breeds will react to this. It is therefore important to keep as many gene pools continuing as possible so future needs can be met where possible. Gene pools should be viewed as precious; because once they are gone (extinct) they can not be replaced.
During the 1940s and 1950s this breed almost became extinct, but due to one breeder at this time who had 80% of the whole breed in his herd, the breed managed to survive and is now of increasing popularity. The Gloucestershire Old spots are now more numerous than any other rare breed of pig in the UK. This indicates that there is increasing knowledge of the importance and potential of this breed.
The Gloucestershire Old spots is now being recognised by both consumers and butchers as a quality, tender, fine grained meat. Supermarkets are on occasions rejecting meat from Gloucestershire Old spots, claiming the meat is too fatty, but this is what is adding to the unique flavour of the meat. Demand for this meat has increased as consumers are becoming more aware of the specialist products available. In the last year there has been an increase in registered breeders of Gloucestershire Old spots. This has therefore helped with the increase in demand for these meat products.
The Gloucestershire Old spot should be conserved as a breed for many reasons. As mentioned above the meat from these pigs is now being recognised as a delicacy and as people are even more concerned with quality of food and many people are now favouring organic ranges this should be noted. There is now also a lot more emphasis on local produce and farmers markets are becoming ever more popular. This is therefore having a positive impact on the sales of meat from this breed as people are likely to be choosing the locally bred meat from this breed over imported meats.
This breed is also a fairly hardy breed which only has minimal requirements, both in terms of feed and shelter. Basic fed such as grazing, root vegetables, apples etc are completely adequate for this breed, meaning they do not require any additional expensive concentrates. This means that they require less intensive farming and therefore lower overheads, making them a fairly low maintenance breed. The breed is also known for having a fairly docile temper, which means they would also be suited to semi intensive straw yard systems.
The Gloucestershire Old spot pig meat is appealing to a niche section of the market, which are willing to pay a higher premium for a product that meets a set criterion. This indicates how this breed is inline with the trend in the UK pig industry of more specialist production and therefore is likely to continue to increase in popularity.
The Gloucestershire Old spot is a breed that is recognised by the RBST as being at risk. However the factors that have been previously mentioned should demonstrate the importance of this breed in the UK market place and therefore indicate that all measures necessary should be taken to preserve this breed. The gene pool of this breed and of all other breeds listed as rare or endangered should be preserved wherever possible so as to avoid future problems as much as possible. The UK is now moving back towards more specialist products and it is visible that consumers are now more willing to pay a premium for products that are of a better quality. This indicates that demand for the meat from this breed should continue to increase, and therefore supply should continue to increase in order to support this potential increase in demand.
