The statement is clearly true, but the majority of people fail to accept the severity of the global warming problem. It is just one way in which the advances in technology over the last century have upset the natural balance of the Earth. For the past 150 years, engineering practice has been based on controlling, rather than co-operating with, nature. Projects have gone ahead with no thought for their social, economic and environmental impact on natural systems. This has resulted in the making of a wasteworld, side by side with a technological wonderworld (6).
The apparently seamless introduction of excellent technology creates the impression that the world can provide an abundance of power and clean water. In the case of water, overuse is highlighted in the short term by drought. However, the effect of society 's addiction to fossil-fuelled power is less obvious (1). For the majority, "there is still this big disconnect between switching the light on and climate change" - Tony Juniper, director of Friends of the Earth, (2).
In the last 10 years, managers have seen from experience that the social, environmental, economic, cultural and ethical aspects of a project are often more important than the technical aspects (6). This knowledge is finally filtering through to society, particularly in Europe, where the Kyoto protocol has been widely accepted. There are now clear signs that the changing environment is adversely affecting human life. Almost a fifth of all ill health in poor countries can be attributed to environmental factors including climate change and pollution, the World Bank has warned (5).
There are an increasing number of parties keen to be seen helping the environment.
Kingsmead primary school in Cheshire has been built with solar panels in the roof, heating powered by biomass, and a rainwater recovery system (4).
Sainsbury 's in North Greenwich has an array of solar panels creating around 5,000 units of electricity per year (4).
Buntingsdale Infant School installed an environmentally friendly heat pump using 'green refrigerants' (4).
Several Hollywood celebrities like to be seen driving their Toyota Priuses, a car powered by a hybrid petrol-electric engine - According to The Sunday Times, Oct 23 2005.
The list goes on; the point being that the issue of pollution is a hot topic.
Although man-made technology has been the cause of many problems, it is likely to also be the solution. Many eco-friendly technologies are being developed, the clear frontrunners being recycling (which accounts for nearly a third of the waste from many European countries) (2) and wind power (which in Spain and Denmark will regularly contribute 20% of total power consumption) - Wind, Geoff Nairn, (3). For many, it is still unclear whether nuclear power is part of the problem or the solution. Several governments, including the UK, are undecided on their nuclear policy.
Not all new environmental technologies are to combat climate change. The French National Assembly has voted to ban all non-biodegradeable plastic bags by 2010. - Technologies of The Future, Fiona Harvey, (3). Most of the harmful technologies we take for granted have more eco-friendly alternative available, but many never reach commercial application because due to lack of funding, or an unhelpful market - Innovation, Geoff Nairn, (3).
If there is to be radical change, it will have to stem mainly from government policy. In many countries there are schemes and subsidies for research and implementation of eco-friendly technologies, but some (namely the US) are still refuting the need for action. Industry has become a cornerstone of economic stability or economic growth, thus all countries fear a reduction in industrial output. "The truth is no country is going to cut its growth of consumption in the light of a long-term environmental problem" - Tony Blair, at the Clinton Global Initiative, New York in September.
However, government policy alone will not save the world. A great deal depends on the next two generation of engineers, having the environmental understanding and the will to start doing things differently. The universities that take this on board sooner rather than later will no doubt be rewarded in the future. 'Climate Change: The Engineering Challenge', The IEE Student & Graduate Magazine, Oct 2005. 'The State We're In', The Guardian, Oct 23 2005. 'Environmental Technologies' supplement, Financial Times, Oct 28 2005.
It 's Only Natural: Building Renewables Into Our Future, a DTI supplement supplied to government and council staff, Dec 2004. 'What the papers say', New Civil Engineer, Oct 13 2005. 'Why The Earth Needs A New Generation of Engineers', The IEE Student & Graduate Magazine, Oct 2005. 'The Core of The Debate', New Civil Engineer, Oct 27 2005.
EAST (Environmental and Sustainable Technology), Sept 2005 volume 3 number 4 - several excellent articles in every issue. A little too detailed and specific for this general introduction, but all very relevant.
The following newspaper articles discuss directly technologies that have an effect on the environment and society:
Sept/Oct - Changing the face of motoring (Fleet Times).
Compares the possible alternatives for fuelling vehicles, and where each has been adopted to date. Particularly impressive are the zero emission fuel cell buses running in London.
Oct 13 - Methanol fuel cells (The Guardian).
Two major mobile handset manufacturers have prototypes powered by methanol fuel cells, which "are touted as clean and efficient" source of power. However, current airline regulations are holding up commercial development.
Oct 23 - Forecasters warn of big drought after big freeze (The Sunday Times).
States: "Until recently it would have been inconceivable to make such firm predictions so far ahead. Recently, however, the Met Office acquired new systems..." and goes on to describe some technological advances at the Met Office. The article explains the effect this particular warning is having on local authorities and health trusts, who will be affected by both the drought and the frozen winter.
Oct 23 - Green cars: My other car 's... not as green as the one I drove to the Oscars (The Sunday Times).
Describes many cases of Hollywood stars who are keen to be seen driving their eco-friendly Toyota Priuses, a car powered by a hybrid petrol-electric engine.
Nov 2 - Post-gasoline car goes for a test drive (The New York Times).
Jon Spallino and his family are the first in the world to have a hydrogen fuel cell powered car, a "silver Honda FCX...worth about $1 million".
Nov 4 - Saving cash is more important than saving the planet (Property Chronicle).
Explains the mood of the general British public about installing environmentally friendly technologies into their homes, and briefly sums up the options available.
Nov 8 - Smart directions for green ideas (BBC news).
Outlines two futuristic ideas that have been pitched as novel ways to employ a new European satellite - both ideas are aimed at helping the environment.
Nov 8 - Funds to promote renewable energy (BBC News).
The UK government has enveiled a   30m funding package aimed at promoting renewable electricity sources and reducing carbon emissions".
Nov 8 - Driving (The Sunday Times).
Raises concern over the actual environmental benefit of the 'eco-friendly' Toyota Prius.
Articles discussing the social, political and environmental effects of climate change and other problems caused by an energy-hungry society:
The stabilisation of the Earth 's environment is going to rely on action in the short, medium and long term. The Kyoto agreement, and the EU 's greenhouse gas emissions trading scheme have been brought into place to encourage immediate action and short term change. Many expect these short term targets to be met by introducing more wind power and nuclear power. In the medium term, switching back to biomass/biogas may help to make our carbon production more sustainable. In the long term, hydrogen is being hailed as the fuel of the future. The burning of hydrogen creates zero emissions, and if implemented well, can use similar production and distribution to biogas. Recycling is an available resource which needs to be exploited far more, and there lies the real challenge - waking society to the scale of the problem, and instilling in people the will to change our lifestyles so that we can live in harmony with nature.
High tech industries have been built on top of ageing techniques for power generation. These techniques all employ fossil fuels, and, unless they are changed, will cause irreversible damage to the environment, and our current way of life.
There are already warning signs of this damage, however, new technology also helps us predict when natural disasters are going to occur, and cope better with the ill effects.
The new technology does exist to put fossil fuels and other types of pollution out of the picture forever, but they are slow in the uptake for the following reasons:
Society is hostile to new, untested technologies, for fear of a Chernobyl style disaster.
Most people adopt a 'not in my back yard' attitude. i.e. understand the need for action, but are uncomfortable with the required changes to their lifestyle. For example, the visual impact of wind farms.
Investors see many new environmentally technologies come and go, many never reaching mass production. This makes it a risky area for investment.
Recycling technology has existed for some time, and many businesses promote 100% recyclable packaging. The problem lies with the consumer - more emphasis needs to be put into the collection of recyclable waste, and into advertising campaigns to change the mindset of the general public.
Wind power, which has 30 years of R&D behind it, and is therefore fairly well supported, cannot supply more than 40% of a country 's power, because it can create enormous problems stabilising the national grid. For legal and economical reasons, countries are unlikely to put themselves in a position where they rely on buying and selling power between their neighbours.
The development of environmental technologies is creating co-operation between many different countries and many different disciplines of science. For example, as wind and wave power become more common, the need for high tech weather forecasting increases. Another example, developed countries (e.g. UK & US) with decades of experience are very eager to help developing countries (e.g. China) to ensure all new power plants benefit are as green and efficient as possible.
In the last 2 years, many governments have pledged to meet difficult emissions targets, and in order to do so, are funding a huge number of research projects.
Planning rules have been relaxed for environmentally friendly technologies, but this is leading to some controversial plans, such as a hydrogen refuelling station in the greenbelt just outside London, or a wind farm off Cape Cod.
It is emerging that the academic teaching of science will need to be seriously changed to emphasise environmental impact of technologies.
