Symbiosis is often defined as 'an ecological relationship between organisms of different species that are in direct contact' (Cambell and Reece 2005, p545). The organisms in the relationship are referred to as the host (the larger) and the symbiont (the smaller). There is a spectrum of symbiosis: Commensalism -where only one of the organisms benefits but does not harm the other to any significance, Mutualism -where both symbionts benefit, and finally Parasitism -only one organism (here called the parasite) benefits from the relationship but at the detriment of the host. However such terms are difficult to define and measure, and instigate questions such as 'what reasons are there for considering predator-prey and herbivore-crop relationships to be different from associations given names like parasitism, symbiosis and commensalism?' (Whitfield 1979, p1). Exploitation of the host environment is very similar to the exploitation of any other environment, however, it may be distinguished by the host environment 's ability to respond adaptively to the presence of the parasite. (Wakefield 1984).
Parasites can be harmful to their host in a variety of ways, including lowering the fitness of the host by draining it of energy and feeding from its tissues and introducing pathogens to the host causing disease, as in the case of the Anopheles mosquitoes and the apicomplexan Plasmodium which causes the human disease 'Malaria'. (Cambell and Reece 2005).
Most of the organisms dealt with by Marquardt and Demaree (Parasitology 1985) are obligate parasites, which need a host for the completion of their life cycles. Although there are some parasites, referred to as facultative parasites that can easily remain free-living but take advantage of hosts if/when the opportunity arises.
Parasites can be divided into two groups:
Ectoparasites, which live outside the skin/feed on the external surface of the host i.e. suck blood, feed upon hair, feathers, skin or its secretions. They have biological and morphological adaptations to help them do this, e.g. enzymes suited to feeding on blood, similar body temp to host. The life cycle involves transmission/ dispersal stages and it may be synchronised with the host. Ticks are an example of ectoparasites.
Endoparasites, which live under the skin/within the body of the host: there are ranges of organisms both prokaryotic and eukaryotic that survive in this way. They have evolved many times - not necessarily from ectosymbionts- and live a wide variety of tissues. Examples of endosymbionts include viruses, bacteria, plasmodium (malaria), schistosoma (causes schistosomiosis) and tape worms (worm eggs cause problems).
Some insects (usually small wasps) lay eggs in or on their host 's surface. The larvae then go on to feed on the living host, eventually killing it. This type of parasitism is called 'Parasitoidism', described by Campbell and Reece (2005).
The life cycle of the parasite involves transmission and dispersal stages and it may be synchronised with the life cycle of the host.
There may be a direct cycle during which the parasite is never exposed to the outside environment. The parasite may reproduce and have an infective stage in the host, which may be preyed upon and eaten. The parasite can then be transmitted to the new host as it is released by digestion, e.g. Trichinella spiralis (Nematoda).
Another possible cycle taken by the parasite whilst still not exposed to the outside is the use of a vector. This is a more indirect cycle and an example of this can be seen in the life cycle of Plasmodium (Protozoa) where it is transferred between humans by the Anopheles mosquitoes. Here, the vector takes up infective stages of the parasite during feeding on the host, these stages develop in the vector until it feeds on a new host, where the parasite can then be transmitted.
Other parasites may be exposed to the outside world by release of eggs but not as a free-living agent and develop and become transmitted directly e.g. Toxoplasma, or indirectly by an intermediate host e.g. tapeworms.
A free-living stage may be seen in the life cycles of hookworms or Schistosoma where parasitic eggs hatch and develop in outside world and may be transmitted to final host directly or indirectly by ingestion/penetration of infective stages or the ingestion of the infective intermediate host. (Wakelin 1984).
Transmission between different species can sometimes be seen, as the closeness of the bond between parasites and their hosts is varies considerably. Some parasites are limited to a single species e.g. Taenia saginata, whilst others are very random e.g. Schiztotrypanum cruzi.
Parasites are not free-living, and this disadvantages them in their ability to adapt themselves to different environments. This is due to any change being significantly different to the previous factor as there are very few intermediates when entering a new host, in comparison to the adaptive potentials of a free-living organism. For example, a song sparrow can experience a huge number of intergrading conditions between the damp, cool forests of the northwest and the dry hot deserts of the southwest while an Ascaris sees no intermediate conditions between the conditions of a pig intestine and that of a human. Therefore any changes must be carried out in one jump, or not at all. This case also gives example of how sometimes inherent host characteristics are of little importance as the parasite 's priority is more inclined to the hosts similar environmental conditions brought about due to shared habits or diets, and adaptation to phylogenetically unrelated hosts can be observed. (Chandler and Read 1961).
There is an interesting and continually evolving relationship that can be seen between the parasite and the host, as both develop immunity against each other and the defences raised. As many of the parasites introduce microbes which bring about disease and infection of tissues animals have both natural and acquired immunity to resist this.
First there may be an incompatibility of parasites to the host that may prevent its infection. E.g. the physical barrier of the skin maybe sufficient enough to keep out some helminths, such as hookworms and schistosomes whose success is reliant on reaching the dermis by penetrating the epidermis and the basement membrane.(Wakelin 1984).
Mucous membranes prevent entry of some microbes into the body and mucus is produced by some of the membrane cells. An example of where this technique of defence is used is in the trachea of mammals. The ciliated epithelial cells present sweep the mucus and trapped microbes upwards to stop them entering and potentially harming the lungs. Secretions can restrain microbial colonisation on surfaces of constantly exposed epithelia by bathing them e.g. tears and saliva. (Cambell and Reece 2005).
Initial development of the parasite may soon be quashed by nutritional deficiencies or lack of more specific conditions for further growth, migrations and reproductive maturation. E.g. Ascaris, A. lumbricoides eggs can survive and hatch perfectly well in many variations of mammalian body where a general environment is shared, however when the parasites then becomes ready for maturation it must migrate to the lungs of the host and will only exist further in the lungs of humans. (Wakelin 1984).
Phagocytosis is a very important defence against invading microbes, whereby the phagocytes (specific type of white blood cell) attach to the microbe allowing it to be engulfed by the cell. An effective response by lysosomes releasing various toxic compounds then destroys the microbe. (Cambell and Reece 2005).
Campbell and Reece (2005) explain how antimicrobial proteins attack microbes directly or hinder its process of reproduction.
Inflammatory response- a standardised response in most higher organisms that causes an increase of blood flow and permeability to the affected area. This allows the required defensive cells and compounds to reach the area more rapidly.
Natural killer cells attack virus-infected cells by releasing chemicals to kill them by apoptosis. Their substantial resistance to cancer is recognised by Campbell and Reece (2005).
Another spectrum of innate response is the behaviour of animals. Some seem to have instinctive ways of freeing themselves of, or avoiding, parasites. E.g. when sheep faeces are infected with worms they infect the ground and cause the growth of lush grass. Sheep seem to sense this danger and avoid these patches. Some animals, such as rats, groom themselves and each other to get rid of lice.
A person who suffers from Sickle cell Anaemia has natural resistance to the human disease Malaria.
Lymphocytes recognise the epitopes (antigenic determinants) of pathogens and can undergo an attack to counteract the specific problem (Campbell and Reece 2005). Lymphocytes only have one type of antigen receptor pattern, however there are 10 7 different antigenic variants. There are therefore a huge number of different lymphocytes to fight against the pathogens with different surface patterns. The advantage of this is specific response.
Recovery from disease provides immunity for the specific disease. This is achieved following the production of the required antibodies to kill/immobilise the organism and subsequent memory cells which mean that the pathogen can be quickly recognised in the future and antibodies can be produced more efficiently.
The defences of some organisms may hold some diseases in check without eliminating it, and the host can live with the parasite in a state of balance. Here there is sufficient parasite population to ensure the production of required defence chemicals, without the numbers being capable of significant harm. (Chandler and Read 1961).
Age resistance - most animals seem to cope better with fighting disease as they get older as the organism is more developed and fitter in adulthood than in childhood. Work by Sandground in 1928 indicated that there is another aspect to age resistance in some disease cases, in that it can be seen to be related to incompatible hosts which is intensified with age. 'It is significant that most cases of human infections with 'foreign' worms belonging in other animals, are recorded in children' (Chandler and Read 1961, p26).
The subject of parasitism is an interesting and highly important one, which is greatly relevant to us all. Parasites have affected nearly everyone in their lives on a very variable scale. Parasites cause 5 of the 6 diseases considered to be the most devastating to human health by the World Health Organisation (Marquardt and Demaree 1985). However life among parasites is inevitable and host density is one of the most important of a number of environmental factors determining transmission rates. Therefore Man himself does increases his chance and the chances of his livestock to infectious disease, however indirectly. The prevention of these scenarios is of course the ultimate objective for immunoparasitologists. There have already been successes in the fight against these organisms in the form of vaccines against parasitic infections but few have reached large-scale commercial production.
The progress that has been made however, includes two of the major parasitic infections of man: Malaria and Schistosomiasis. The success of previous work has been hugely significant in saving countless lives, an example of this seen in the decrease of cases and death rates of people with Malaria, which is prominent in approx. 100 countries. Jones (1967) concluded from a variety of sources that previous to the eradication efforts that began in the late 1940s, there were approximately 350 million cases of malaria per year over the world, which can be compared to the current 100 million (approx.) cases per year.
Relationships between parasites and their hosts following evolution exist in all species, and as pointed out by Wakelin (1984) exploitation of the environments provided by the bodies of living animals is, in essence, no different from the exploitation of the environments provided by the seas, the land fresh waters.
