Nitrogen leaching is currently a major economic and environmental concern. A clear understanding of the Nitrogen cycle would help to make a profitable use of fertilisers and manure, and reduce the nitrogen content in the water cycle and atmosphere. Below is a map of the areas in Europe currently at risk form nitrogen leaching. Areas at risk from severe leaching are classified as NVZ 's, Nitrogen Vulnerable Zones. There are restrictions in the use of fertilisers in these zones. DEFRA send out information to farms in these zones to help protect the water course and give help to farmers on controlling the amount of Nitrates in the soil and water. The Nitrates Directive was set up in 1991 and is designed to, 'Help protect the water environment against Nitrate pollution from agricultural land'. ().
A plant needs many elements to help it survive and grow; these include Nitrogen, Potassium, Phosphorus, Calcium, Sodium, Magnesium, Oxygen, Hydrogen and Carbon. The three elements usually used in fertilisers are Nitrogen (N), Phosphorus (P) and Potassium (K). N is essential for growth as it is needed to synthesis proteins, store energy and build and maintain the plant skeleton. If a plant is deficient in N it usually has little grown, a thin, weak texture and a weed-like appearance. N losses are more apparent on arable land than grassland but both systems need inputs of N to help the crops grow, the major input of N is from fertiliser but livestock also produce manure and urine which also add to the N content in the soil. The nitrogen cycle is summarised below;.
The most common N fertilisers in 1980 were Urea (35%), Ammonium Nitrate (20%), Ammonium Sulphate (8%) and Calcium Ammonium Nitrate (6%) but the most common in the UK are Calcium Ammonium Nitrate and Urea. Organic Nitrogen is the main form in the soil but to be taken up by the plant it needs to be mineralised into Ammonium Nitrate or Nitrate. (P. Newbould) Every year around 3% of the N in the soil is mineralised so 80-100Kg/ha is available to the plants. Rainfall and deposits can add 10-20Kg/Ha but grass needs between 100-400Kg/Ha to make it an economically viable yield, N fertilisers are essential. The efficiency of N is only about 50% so about 200-800kg/Ha of N is needed every year. (P. Newbould) This is due to Nitrogen leaching from the soil.
Since the introduction of chemical N fertilisers the yields of crops and the amount of livestock produced have increased steadily. There has been a reduction in the amount of fertilisers used in recent years as plateaus are reached in the yield and production, however much N is used. There have also been environmental concerns as Nitrates continue to pollute the watercourse. Below is a graph showing the increase and decrease in the amount of N fertiliser used.
A study was conducted at the Royal agricultural College on Coates Farm to improve N leaching from land previously used as arable and being converted into grazing land for cattle. The major input of N at first was fertiliser but once the cattle were brought in the amount of fertiliser used decreased due to N being present in their excrements. The study was conducted between 2000 and 2003. In the driest winter the fields lost less than 10Kg N ha -1 while in the wettest winter the lose was nearly 200Kg N ha -1 this was also when the ground was most heavily grazed by the cattle. The average lose of N was 87 Kg N ha -1 over the four winters of the study. (K. Goulding et al) The conclusion was that calculating correct amounts of fertiliser needed for different fields reduced leaching as well as efficiently using the recycled manure and amount of feed given to livestock.
The time of year N is applied heavily influences the amount leached from the soil. Most N is applied to fields in spring and summer. Applying in early spring is however the most dangerous time due to the low temperatures and the ground being saturated so the N is unable to reach the soil. However, farmers want to apply N as soon as possible so to reduce the amount time cattle spend in housing and to lengthen the growing season of the grassland. If temperatures are high in the autumn and the grassland has been heavily grazed an application of N will benefit the following years yield as long as heavy rainfall is not predicted. This is due to more biomass accumulation and an increase in nitrogen uptake by plants; therefore leaching should be at a minimum. The right time to apply N to grassland is therefore difficult to determine but a rough guide would be as soon as the grass begins to show growth again after the winter months. There is a two-five week period when if N is applied at the amount lost will be minimal and the yield should be over 90% of its maximum, (R. J Stevens).
Another strategy for reducing N leaching is to remove the livestock from fields earlier in the growing season to reduce the amount of nitrates left in the soil that could be leached over the winter. The manure produced from the livestock in housing can also be used as a fertiliser in the spring after the periods of heavy rainfall. This therefore recycles the N efficiently and potentially reduces the amount of N in the watercourse. Feeding cereals to livestock that have low N concentrations such as maize silage will also reduce the amount of N excreted into the soil when they are kept on the grassland. Less intensive systems do also reduce the amount of leaching but also require more space, which is not always possible or economically efficient.
Currently the recommended amount of Nitrates present in water is to be less than 50mg/l as set by the World Health Organisation and the European Union so it is safe for consumption. (C. Stopes) Nitrates are soluble in water so therefore become present in drainage and ground water. This then becomes an environmental concern as it reaches rivers and lakes and pollutes the water and creating eutrophication. A way of reapplying the N leached away in the surface run-off water would be to irrigate it back on to the grassland this also stops some of it being present in drinking water and the watercourse.
To reduce the amount of N available a ban or a tax increase could be introduced by the government. This has already been put in place by Sweden who imposed a tax on N fertilisers of 10%. It has had no major effect on the sales of N fertilisers as economists have predicted a rise of up to 200% for it to have any significant effect on the sales of N fertilisers. (P. Newbould) Currently a ban would not help work hunger problems, as N is needed to meet the high levels of production needed.
In tropical areas the El Nino and La Nina effects affect the amount of N leaching. In El Nino years sea levels rise and weather conditions change causing a lower biomass accumulation in the soil. This means that in El Nino years N leaching levels are higher. The amount of fertiliser should therefore be altered accordingly to suit the climatic conditions.
Soil type affects the amount of leaching. Soils, which have a low drainage rate, obviously have a higher rate of leaching. Leaching is also higher in soils with a low cation exchange and soils with a higher pH. Area with these types of soils should then be more aware of N leaching and plant crops, which take up N efficiently and quickly. Grass types also vary the rate of leaching as they absorb nitrates at different rates. In organic conversion farms red clover is planted for three years to maximise the N in the soil, as clover is a quick and efficient N fixer. Clover can be used in conjunction with grass for grazing but it does not establish itself well and too much can lead to bloat in ruminants. Crop rotation in arable farms and set-a-side land can also preserve and retain the N in the soil meaning less fertiliser needs to be used.
Although leaching is the main cause of Nitrate loss, soil erosion can also be a factor. Loses from erosion are not generally a problem in Western Europe but can be a big problem on peaty soils especially in upland areas. Heavily leached soils also have a tendency to be easily eroded as the water washes away soil particles quickly.
The use of N fertilisers should be proportional to the climate and soil type and be more readily available in areas with favourable climates and retentive soils. Sensitive areas need to have more responsive crops such as grasslands and maize as they utilise nitrates efficiently. If guidelines were followed then yields and productivity would be able to reach a healthy rate without damaging habitats and environments.
