Table 1 contains the data used in this exercise, which consists of five assemblages of Upper Palaeolithic endscrapers recovered from the rockshelter site of No'kulchaear. Table 2 shows the summary statistics for each assemblage (mean, median, mode, standard error, standard deviation, sum, sample size). The mean lengths of the endscrapers in each assemblage have been compared in Figure 1.
The five assemblages were tested for normality in three ways - production of a histogram for each assemblage (Figures 2-6), and two calculations, which are summarised in Table 3.
In the skewness/standard error and kurtosis/standard error tests, the data is normal if the values for both tests lies between -1.99 and +1.99. As Table 3 shows, all the assemblages have values in this range and are therefore normal. The histograms show that all the data have a fairly normal distribution, although Assemblage D has an anomalous peak at 45-50mm, and B and C have no data in one range.
The ANOVA (analysis of variance) test will compare the mean lengths of all five assemblages to see if the differences between the assemblages are statistically significant. The significance level is set at 0.05. Two hypotheses may be established.
H 0 - the differences between the mean lengths of the endscrapers of the five assemblages are not statistically significant.
H 1 - the differences between the mean lengths of the endscrapers of the five assemblages are statistically significant.
The ANOVA test produced a P-value of 9.09 x10 -6 (Table 4). This exceeds the significance value (i.e. is less than 0.05), and therefore the null hypothesis (H 0) can be rejected in favour of H 1, that the difference in the mean lengths of the five assemblages is statistically significant.
The ANOVA test was also applied to test the significance of the differences between mean lengths of Assemblages X and B, again at 0.05 significance. The hypotheses are given below, and the results are in Table 5.
H 0 - the differences between the mean lengths of the endscrapers of Assemblages X and B are not statistically significant.
H 1 - the differences between the mean lengths of the endscrapers of Assemblages X and B are statistically significant.
The P-value exceeds the significance value (0.05) and therefore the null hypothesis is rejected in favour of the hypothesis that the differences in mean endscraper length between the two assemblages are significant (H 1).
The same test was carried out to compare Assemblages X and E. The same parameters were used, and the results are in Table 6.
H 0 - the differences between the mean lengths of the endscrapers of Assemblages X and E are not statistically significant.
H 1 - the differences between the mean lengths of the endscrapers of Assemblages X and E are statistically significant.
The P-value for these assemblages does not exceed the significance value (0.05), therefore the null hypothesis is upheld. There is no statistically significant difference between the mean length of the endscrapers in assemblages X and E.
The chi-squared test is used to test the distribution of the endscrapers in relation to the distribution of animal bones on the site. This test was performed on Assemblage A, and the null and alternative hypotheses are given below. The observed values are given in Table 7 and the expected values calculated in Table 8 by multiplying the sum for the row with the sum for the column and dividing by the total number of observations. The significance level of this test is 0.05, and there is 1 degree of freedom.
H 0 = the observed distribution of the endscrapers and animal bones in Assemblage A is not statistically significant.
H 1 = the observed distribution of the endscrapers and animal bones in Assemblage A is statistically significant.
For Assemblage A, the calculated X 2 value exceeds the X 2 value of 3.84 at 1 degree of freedom at the 0.05 significance level (Table 9). Therefore, the null hypothesis is rejected in favour of H 1, that there is a statistical significance to the observed distribution of endscrapers and animal bones in this assemblage.
The same calculations were performed for Assemblage C, for which the observed values are given in Table 10 and the expected values in Table 11.
H 0 = the observed distribution of the endscrapers and animal bones in Assemblage C is not statistically significant.
H 1 = the observed distribution of the endscrapers and animal bones in Assemblage C is statistically significant.
For Assemblage C, the calculated X 2 value does not exceed the X 2 value of 3.84 at 1 degree of freedom at 0.05 significance level (Table 12). Therefore, the null hypothesis is upheld.
This test establishes whether there is a correlation between two variables, in this case the tools:waste flake ratio and the distance to the flint source. This data is presented in Table 14, and the two variables are plotted against each other in Figure 7. The correlation value is calculated in Table 15, and shows a very strong correlation ( 0.8) between the two variables.
The tools:waste flake ratio and the mean endscraper length were also tested for correlation. A correlation value of - 0.14 (Table 16) suggests that there is no apparent correlation between the two variables, and this is supported by the appearance of the scattergram (Figure 8).
The linear regression equation is.
The regression equation for the correlation between tools:waste flake ratio and distance to the source (Figure 7) is.
Using this equation, the number of waste flakes in a new set of assemblages (F-J) can be predicted from the distance to the source of the raw material. Once the ratio is calculated, the actual number of waste flakes can be predicted using the formula:
The results of these calculations for the new assemblages are presented in Table 17.
