Sheepdrove organic farm is located in Lambourne, Berkshire, it is an organic farm with several enterprises including pigs, cattle, sheep, broilers turkeys and crops. The farm was established thirty years ago with the aim of running a farm that was self-sufficient. The farm has since grown and now covers an area of 2,250 acres and employing 40 people. There is an eco friendly conference centre located on the farm which is used by various organisations such as Vodafone, Waitrose and Landrover, and is used to promote the farm produce. The farm has shops located in Bristol and London and on the farm, there is also an internet site, all the meat and vegetables that are produced on the farm are available from shops and the internet site.
There are many enterprises on the farm which could not all be covered in this report so I am going to talk about the free range poultry enterprise. In total there are 25,000 chickens on the farm, the chicks are bought onto the farm at a day old and are stored in house for the first three weeks of their lives, the chicks have access to conservatories so they can get used to natural daylight and sounds of the outside world, such as tractors, cows and birds are played into the shed. This gives the chickens sold from Sheepdrove a unique selling point as they can claim that the chickens although reared inside to start with have always had an experience of outside life, and also they are probably one of the only farms in the country to play music to their chicks.
The chickens are transferred to outdoor mobile houses after three weeks. The houses are located in grassy paddocks with each one having around 1000 chickens in each shed. The sheds are on skids and so can be moved around to different paddocks using a tractor, all the sheds have mains water and the power is provided by solar panels on the roofs of the sheds.
The chickens are feed a mix of Wheat, Beans and Soya in pellet form and are also able to roam the paddock to forage for other food. The feed is distributed using a hopper system that can hold 10 tonnes and is filled once a week using a tractor and feeder wagon. The feed ratio for these slower growing birds is around 2:2.5, commercial birds which are faster growing will have a feed ratio closer to 2:1. The paddocks are also surrounded by hedgerows with herb strips containing birds foot trefoil, yarrow, marigold, salad burnet, sheeps parsley and vetches, the chickens use this for foraging and for self medicating.
The chickens have to be kept on the farm for at least 70 days under soil association rules to qualify as organic, are slaughtered at 77 days. When the birds are slaughtered they weigh 2.7 kg, and 1.8 kg after processing. These weights are very different to intensive poultry farming where the birds are slaughtered at 41 days, with a live weight of 2-3 kg. The longest most birds are kept in intensive broiler production is 60 days, after this time the birds would weigh 3.5kg live weight, 2.2kg after processing, (Agriculture Notebook, 2003), this is very different to the free range chickens who are 17 days older and 0.4 kg lighter when killed. This means there is greater expense to produce free range poultry, not only do the birds have to be kept for longer, they also weigh less. This means the farm is reliant on receiving a good price for the organic free range meat. This can cause problems though with diseases, as the farm is organic it cannot vaccinate its chickens, so when they do contract diseases medicines have to be administered and then a withdrawal period is needed, this can mean that chickens are kept on the farm longer than necessary just so they kept their organic status. In total around 40p is spent of each medication for each chick with the main reason for its administration being infectious bronchitis.
All the chickens are slaughtered at the on site processing plant, the farm slaughters 2000 of its own birds a week, with a further 5000 finished birds being brought in from local farms. Around 80% of the meat is sold to Waitrose with the rest being sold through the farm shops and internet site. The unit is run by one poultry foreman, and there are also four general farm workers who assist with the foreman. At present the farm is having problems with the transition from the store to the field, when the birds are first put outside there is a loss in body weight which is resulting in a loss of 20-30g on a finished bird, this is costing the farm around   200,000 a year. This needs to be resolved to stop this major loss in income, one option is to wait longer until the chicken is not at such a vital stage in its growing phase, this will help to reduce the amount of weight lost, the problem with this is that the chickens need to be housed for longer and therefore another store will be needed to hold the new chicks that will arrive during this longer period.
The inputs, processes and outputs for the system are shown in table one. As can be seen from the table there is quite a high amount of input needed to achieve the output. The output is a good that will fetch a high price and so therefore these high inputs are worth it. Prices for the organic free range meat are never likely to fall in the foreseeable future as demand is still increasing as the public move away from meat that has been produced in intensively housed units, this is supported by The Agricultural Notebook (2003) which states, "The demand for poultry meat produced from drug-free fed birds will continue and expand. Growth in organically produced meat and eggs from chickens housed and managed under semi-natural and total extensive management systems is forecast to double within the next decade". If prices did decline, or the market for them disappear then the farm would be at risk of serious financial loss, the broilers are the most profitable enterprise on the farm so a large loss of income would occur, the high investment in the housing for and the processing plant could also be lost if the enterprise had to cease.
The poultry system is efficient and has been created to supply an existing and expanding market, this is reflected by the fact that is it the most profitable enterprise on the farm. The only improvement that needs to be made is creating a new transition system which does not cause the chickens to lose weight when they are moved outside, and therefore increase the profit of the enterprise.
