Many people in the construction industry have different opinions on the exact definition of 'intelligent buildings'. Some of these definitions include: "A building that is fully leased." So according to this, any feature that helps to lease a building fully could be thought of as intelligent. "An intelligent building combines innovations, technological or not, with skillful management, to maximize return on investment." This definition resulted from the International Symposium on the Intelligent Building, May 28 and 29, 1985 in Toronto.
The Intelligent Building Institute proposed: "an intelligent building is one that provides a productive and cost-effective environment through optimization of its four basic elements - structure, systems, services and management - and the interrelationships between them. Intelligent buildings help business owners, property managers and occupants to realize their goals in the areas of cost, comfort, convenience, safety, long-term flexibility and marketability." "Intelligent buildings use electronics extensively and are high-technology related.".
An intelligent building "... provides a responsive, effective and supportive environment within which the organisation can achieve its business objectives". (Worthington, 1997:89) "An intelligent building is one that creates an environment that maximizes the efficiency of the occupants while allowing effective management of resources with minimum lifetime costs." The Intelligent Building Institute.
All these definitions point in the same direction. An intelligent building uses a high level of technology that enables it to be proficiently managed while maintaining an energy efficient existence.
Due to the relatively high cost of manufacture, these buildings are mainly constructed for leasing agencies. The buildings are leased to companies generally as offices. Some companies have them build for themselves mainly large internationals and multinationals. Large establishments such as schools, universities, councils and governments also use intelligent buildings. It is very rare to have intelligent buildings as domestic properties but some do have a certain degree of intelligent features.
As already mentioned intelligent buildings use a high level of technology, this relies heavily on electronics. With regard to the use of electronic technologies we can split them into four groups:
In an ideal world all the systems would be part of one integral system. This system could be controlled and managed from a single computer. All the hardware and software of the systems would be from a single source that uses the same interfaces so that all systems are compatible.
In the present state of world energy is used very carelessly. The aim of some of the intelligent systems is to keep energy use to a minimum. Not only does this save the building occupier money on their fuel bills, it is also good for the environment. The schemes used to implement energy efficiency include;.
An example of a programmed start/stop system would be an escalator system. The escalators in a shopping centre do not want to be run continuously, they only need to operate during the hours of trade. Therefore they would be on a timer that activates them at the beginning of the day and turns them off at the end.
Optimal start/stop is used in lighting systems. Motion sensors are used to detect when someone enters a room then the lights are turned on automatically.
Duty cycling means to change or control the duty cycle (ie. The ratio of on-period to total cycle time) of on/off controlled equipment. For example instead of simply turning heating on and off, a thermostat is used to keep the temperature at a certain level.
These schemes are primarily part of control systems. Such control systems are known as;.
These are basically, systems that uphold the health and safety of the buildings' occupiers. The systems involved in this are;.
These systems reduce the dependence on manpower. For example only a single or pair of security guards is needed to protect a building instead of a team. This is because of intrusion alarms and the ability to observe the whole building via CCTV. These can also provide solid evidence for use in investigations.
The HVAC/R system controls the Heating, Ventilation, Air Conditioning and Refrigeration.
The UPS system provides power protection to entire buildings served by a single source and protects power sensitive equipment from the detrimental effects of power disturbances such as voltage sags, surges, transients, momentary disruptions, and complete outages.
Communication and information is an important part of everybody 's life. For businesses it will affect performance and in turn profits if this is not quick and easily accessible. These systems enable rapid communication and put information at people 's fingertips.
A Private Branch Exchange (PBX) is a telephone network with a building/s. A PBX will contain a number of outside lines for making external calls. PBX 's are used because it is cheaper than connecting an external line to every phone in the building/s. Also it is quick and easy to contact other users within the PBX by simply dialling a three or four digit number. A Public Announcement (PA) system may also be integral with a PBX.
Cablevision is essentially high speed Internet, cable television and digital voice service. The Internet is an important information and communication tool. Information can be obtained from websites and communication via email, instant messaging services and video conferencing.
A videotext system displays information as text and simple pictures. The London Stock Exchange uses this system to display up to date information about stocks and shares.
Ethernet is a network of computers and other devices linked by cables and/or wireless transmitters and receivers. This enables uses to send and receive and/or access information of other computers on the network. There are two types of Ethernet, Local Area Network (LAN) and Wide Area Network (WAN). LAN would be within a single building whereas WAN would connect several different buildings maybe miles apart.
This mainly consists of software based intelligent features.
Word processing includes the electronic creation, revision, storage, retrieval, and transmission of correspondence documents. These documents can be transferred in a number of different ways, either over the buildings Ethernet, the Internet or in physical form by courier or post.
Computer Aided Design (CAD) is an important tool that allows the users to make adjustments and modifications to a design without having to redraft. This is a great time and money saving.
The type of building I choose to build shall be a domestic property. The location of the building shall be very important. Firstly I shall want it to be a rural location but this might conflict with the second factor. The second factor is the area must have broadband for high-speed Internet access. Currently rural areas in the UK have limited broadband availability. Therefore a few miles outside of a major town shall have to suffice. Ideally an old farm barn to be converted into a dwelling shall make a good start. Also a few aches of land preferably with woodland. I want the house to use a high level of technology for comfort, ease of living and entertainment. But I do n't want to compromise my main objective. That is to an energy efficient home that uses 'Green' energy and resources and as much recycled materials as possible.
The main living area shall be large and so the main source of light for this room shall be natural. An external wall of this room shall be glass so that as much light as possible could be utilised. The top floor rooms in the house shall use roof light windows, as this shall also maximise natural light. All the windows throughout the house shall be triple glazed windows that are self-cleaning. Triple glazed windows have a low U-value so heat loss is kept to a minimum. Also they have good sound reduction and added security. Self-cleaning windows have a transparent titanium dioxide coating that is chemically fused to the glass. This reacts with UV rays in natural light resulting in a photocatalytic reaction that oxidizes organic dirt and loosens it from the surface. Water is needed to rinse this loosened dirt away so there is a built in sprinkler system that does this. But of course being in the UK the precipitation level is relatively high so the sprinkler system shall only be needed in the height of summer or during drought periods.
Any additional timbers needed shall be from a reclaimed source. This shall prevent the use of new wood from ever dwindling global forests. Also bricks and roof tiles shall be from reclaimed sources so their age shall match that of the style of the building.
Insulation throughout the entire house shall be AIR-CELL insulation. This includes walls, ceilings, roof and floor. AIR-CELL uses an advanced thermo cellular reflective structure that is only 7mm thick.
A HVAC system shall be used so in summer the house shall be cool and in winter it shall be warm. Also humidity levels shall be kept at a healthy level throughout the whole year. There shall be hand held portable thermostats for adjusting the temperature. In rooms with tiled floors (ie. Bathrooms and kitchen) there shall be under-floor heating. This uses electrical heating elements that keep the floor at a certain temperature. The internal wall coverings shall be mainly lighter colours to aid light dissipation, lighter colours also tend to induce 'happy' moods in people.
There shall be a wet and dry sauna room, hot tub/whirlpool bath and up and down stairs shower rooms, also on-suite for the master bedroom.
The kitchen shall be equipped with all the modern day appliances, fridge/freezer, dishwasher, washing machine, tumble dryer, microwave, oven and halogen hob. All the appliances shall be selected by the EU energy label system. They shall ideally all be 'A Rated' appliances (A++ for the fridge).
There shall be an Ethernet with sockets in the main rooms of the house. The router used shall also have wireless 802.11g technology for roaming by laptops and other wireless enabled devices. Rooms with hifi systems shall be equipped with an Apple Airport Express for streaming Airtunes. Also the main rooms shall have cable television enabled sockets.
Solar power. The roof shall be tiled using Solar Roof Tiles. As for this project money is no object so the whole roof shall be tiled using these. If money were a factor then only a portion of the south facing side would be done as the north facing side typically produces only 60% of the power of a south side.
Wind Energy. As mentioned earlier the house shall be situated within a few aches of land. If the location has sufficient wind speed and power then a small wind turbine farm shall be erected. On average the money saved on electricity bills over 15years shall recoup the cost of these turbines. Any extra electricity generated can also be sold back to the energy supplier.
Water Usage. The waste water from bath, showers, sinks and dishwasher, and rainwater can be collected in a tank. It is filtered to remove  'sludge' and soap scum, and then used to flush toilets. This saves the drinking quality water that is usually used to flush toilets. Not only does it save money on utility bills but also energy and chemicals that go into producing clean water.
All these systems used shall be controlled via a 'central' computer. Not only shall it make the management of the systems easier, it shall also enable data to be collected so optimum configurations can be obtained.
