The aim of this experiment was to run a series of set measured tests on a 3-phase induction motor in order to understand its properties both as a motor and as a generator under both grid-connected and stand-alone environments. Measurements such as Voltages, Currents and Motor Rotation speeds were taken in order to calculate the various parameters of component reactance 's and efficiency curves. This allowed us to deduce which circuit configuration would be best suited to be used in both a stand-alone and grid-connected generating environment.
Details regarding how induction generators work, the equipment used within the test and a list of aims and equations used are given in the accompanying lab sheet (1) in the Appendix.
In this experiment we ran the induction motor with no loads attached, either to its rotor shaft, or within the circuit. The circuit used for testing is shown in figure.1. The 3-phase, 400V, 50Hz supply was connected through a 0-400V variable voltage output autotransformer allowing us to vary the voltage supply to the induction motor. The measured parameters of line current, voltage, watts and motor rpm are shown in figure.2.
From our results obtained in table figure.2, we can work out the calculations for the Volt Amp Reaction, Input (Apparent) Power, and the Magnetising components losses.
The total 'Volt Amp' (VAr) reaction (Reactive power) can be obtained from: 220V, 1.85A, 110W (Active Power Total), 36.67W (Power in each phase).
The magnetising components X m and R c represent the reactance of the magnetic field (X m), and the resistance due to losses in the magnetic core (R c). (Reactance generating the magnetic field) 260V, 3A, 250W (Power Total), 83.33W (Phase Power).
Figure.3 Shows that as we increase the line voltage up to the motors rated 200-220V the line current drawn increases from 0.75 to 1.4Amps. At 260V the current drawn by the motor increases to 3.3Amps.
Applying a voltage and current through the motors 4-pole stator coils generates a magnetic field within the ferromagnetic core material that the coils are wrapped around. The potential effect of this magnetic field causes a rotating magnetic flux that flows through each of the stator cores (set at 120 deg in 3 phase motor) and it 's this rotating flux that induces the magnetised 4-pole rotor inside the 3 coils to react and hence rotate. The ferromagnetic cores can only generate so much magnetic field strength and hence flux. We reach a point whereby the ferromagnetic core will not generate any more magnetic fields no matter how much we increase the current. This is known as the  'saturation point' or  'sweet spot' of the magnetising curve and can be seen on figure.3 at approx 200V at 1.5Amps. Incidentally this is the roughly the rated Voltage for our motor. The motor is efficiently converting current into useful magnetic flux, we have to apply a lot more current to increase the magnetic flux by only a very small amount and therefore beyond the  'saturation point' the motor draws too much current and becomes inefficient.
The reason the motor speed (rpm) stays constant no matter what the voltage/current is, is due to the supply frequency of 50Hz. When the motor is connected to a 50Hz grid supply, the synchronised speed of a 4-poled machine will always be 1500rpm.
The circuit for this test was the same as that seen in figure.1. The line voltage was set back down to zero to ensure motor had stopped. The rotor shaft fan was locked with a screwdriver, and then the line voltage was turned up slowly until the current matched the motors rated full-load current of 3A. Figure.4 Shows the measurements taken:
So.....
Most of the 3.3Amp current was flowing through the rotor circuit. This was because the rotor was locked and not free to react to the rotating magnetic flux in the stator, so the flux induced current flow in the rotor circuit. The Voltage supplied to the motor was 55V. This measured Voltage is much reduced from the normal (rated) operating voltage of 220V at 3Amps. The line voltage (Potential difference) dropped significantly during the test because a large majority of the current energy flowing through the stator coils was not being used to rotate the rotor via the rotor inductors cutting the stator coils flux. So the potential difference (V Supply) was less (55V) than when the rotor rotates at the full speed of near 1500rpm at 220V. At this speed the rotor would be extracting a lot of induced energy out of the flux, hence more current energy is consumed in the stator coils and the potential difference is therefore greater (220V).
The Stator (R 1) and Rotor (R 2) winding resistances have to be split.
This is done by measuring the 'phase-to-phase resistance', the D.C resistance between 2 phases. The motor was unplugged from the autotransformer to measure the phase-to-phase resistance.
The circuit was connected to the 3-phase 50Hz grid supply as shown in figure.5. The supply voltage to the motor was set to 220V allowing the motor to rotate at no load. Two water pumps were turned on and valves opened to allow an increasing water flow to hit the 'Turgo' turbine attached to the spinning rotor. As the water pressure was increased, the water pressure, line voltage, current, electric power and motor speed were measured. The results can be seen in figure.6.
Figure.6 Shows that at 'no load' the motor is running at a rotation speed of 1440rpm, which is just below its grid connected synchronous speed of 1500rpm. This could be due to either some electrical circuit losses, the turbine causing drag slowing the rotor speed, or the motor being rated to run at 1500rpm at 240V (we are running at 220V). As the water pressure increased on the turbine, this induced more torque power to the rotor giving more electric power in watts per phase. At a water pressure of 10psi the total power in watts was decreasing as the motor started to generate power due to the increasing torque on the rotor from the water pressure reacting on the turbine. Above water pressures of 10 to 15psi the motor stopped acting as a motor and generated an output measured on the Wattmeter 's in negative total Watts. This was because the power (electrical energy) had changed flow direction within the circuit. Figure.7 Shows that when the power was flowing from the supply to the motor, this gave positive Watts Power. When the motor started to generate power to the grid and act as a generator, the output power became negative.
Figure.8 Shows that whilst the motor was drawing a current from the grid supply, it drew a steady 1.8Amps. When the water pressure was above 10 to 15psi causing the rotor turbine to rotate at higher speeds above the grid synchronised (and rated) speed of 1500rpm, the current output increased to 3.1 at 1560rpm. This was because the motor was generating power above 1500rpm. This is motor was now generating in a 'Supersyncronous' or 'Oversyncronous' mode.
By using our results data in figure.6 we can see that the generator was generating the most current (3.1Amps) at 25psi of water pressure. There were many losses between the water pressure meter and the water hitting the turbine such as pipe length causing flow restriction, valves, pipe couplings etc. We assumed a total loss of energy between the meter and the turbine of approx 30%.
Turbine Input power can be obtained by reading off the power/pressure graph as provided in the labsheet. 17.5 psi gives 1000 Watts of Turbine Pressure Input.
In order to calculate the generator efficiency we would use the equation:
We know the Electrical Power Output but we do not know the Mechanical Power Input, so we can use the computer simulated performance graphs provided for this motor in this experiment.
The computer simulated Machine (Generator) Efficiency/speed graph seen in the Appendix shows that at 1560rpm the Generator efficiency was at its optimum point which was roughly 78% efficient.
Overall System efficiency = 47.5%.
Also..
By re-arranging this we can work out the Turbine Efficiency:
As induction motors do not have any internal source of magnetism except for a little residual magnetism, capacitors have to be used to 'excite' the machine in order to generate power in a stand-alone system. Capacitors can absorb the residual magnetic leakage flux from the stator coils when the motor was last running. Capacitors can store this energy as reactive power to then create a voltage across the 'exciter' circuit within the stator coils when the motor is required as a generator. When the rotor is turned by means of a turbine via input energy from hydro power for example, the voltage released by the capacitors flows through the exciter circuit and this helps to kick start the current flow in the coils to generate an output. Figure.9 Shows how we require 3 capacitors to be connected in delta across the 3-phase delta connected stator coils (1 capacitor for each coil).
To calculate the capacitor size required for this motor we use the following equation: (Using Q total value calculated from the no load running light test).
So using 18 microfarads capacitors are more than adequate as they will not become fully charged or electrically overloaded in the case of using capacitors of less than 15 microfarads.
To calculate the frequency (and hence synchronous speed) that this motor will be running at using 18 microfarad capacitors with a line Voltage of 260V we use the following equations:
Theoretical frequency at which our generator should operate at = 63.6 Hz.
Method:
Figure.10 Shows the circuit connected for this test. Here we can see the three capacitors wired in delta across the stator coils in the motor. Instead of being connected to the grid supply, the motor is connected to a 3-phase load, this was just load resistor bank connected in 'Delta' configuration inside a 'black box'.
Each time we increased the load we increased the water pressure accordingly until the output line voltage read 220V, then took readings of the current, voltage, power, water pressure and generator (motor) speed (Figure.11). The voltage was raised to 220V to simulate the voltage of the grid, as any consumers effectively connected to this system would require a 220V supply.
Our results as seen in Figure.11 show that this system would not work well for a micro hydro power set up because the system is too dependant on load demand. As the load required increases so the hydropower water pressure to the turbine needs to increase in order to speed up the generator to generate more power output.
The computer simulated Machine Efficiency/speed graph (see Appendix) shows that a generator needs to run at an optimum fixed speed to obtain the best electrical output efficiency. So increasing and decreasing the generator speed according to load demand is a very inefficient way of generating a power supply (Figure.14). If the load demand were to suddenly fall (by consumers switching electrical items off), this system would become very unstable as the turbine would still be spinning the rotor at 1716rpm and the electrical power produced would have no where to go.... As this stand alone system is not connected to the grid OR have any means with which to 'offload' excess power, this could seriously damage the equipment!.
Single-phase operation is possible by attaching a single-phase load across two phases of the Induction motor and the capacitors.
Figure.15 shows the circuit connections for the test. One phase of the three-phase resistor bank was used as the Ballast load resistor. The single-phase load consisted of an array of parallel-connected lamps that could be connected in and out of the circuit via individual switches. Initially these would be switched off.
In order to excite the machine the ballast resister was kept at zero. The water was turned on to bring the machine up to speed (1580rpm). The water flow was turned up further before switching in a ballast resistance of 200W. The water pressure was increased so the voltage was a constant 220V. The usual measurements of Voltage, Current, Wattmeters, and rpm, including the percentage of load going into the ballast resister as individual lights were turned on were recorded as shown in table (Figure.16).
The Voltage, Current, Wattmeters and Motor speed remained constant regardless of how many lights were turned on. Figure.16 Shows that as lights were turned on (load increased), the percentage of power being absorbed by the load resistor was less. Energy was being used to light bulbs instead of it being absorbed by the load resistor.
This system set up would work well for a stand-alone micro-generation scheme such as micro-hydro as long as the water pressure could be controlled using a governing system in order to maintain the required voltage. The circuit ensured a set of stable operating conditions for both the generator and the load. The generator was running at its rated voltage and near-enough current, so therefore could run efficiently. The load had the required voltage and current to suit its needs, until of course the load exceeded the total power output from the generator. The major drawback with this system set up though is the huge energy losses being absorbed and dissipated out through the load resistor when the load does not require the energy.
As discussed before in section.6 the single-phase ballast system set up could work well for a stand-alone micro-generation scheme such as micro-hydro but only if the water pressure could be controlled in order to maintain the required voltage.
Advantages (if the water flow and power electronics regulations were automated):
System would be fairly rugged and robust as the only moving parts would be the turbine rotor shaft and a few valves therefore low maintenance.
System would be relatively cheap to install and once installed have few operating costs.
The system is running in stable operating conditions no matter what the load requirement is. The generator is continuously running at 1580rpm, which according to the Machine efficiency/speed curve is the most efficient speed for this motor to run at.
The system is relatively efficient if either all the electrical power being generated is being used by consumers, OR if not, the heat produced due to excess load being dissipated into the ballast resister bank is utilised for example to heat consumers homes. If this waste heat is not utilised then the ballast resistor bank contributes the greatest inefficiency to the whole system.
Disadvantages:
Loads would be strictly limited to the power output of the generator.
If the system were to maximise energy generated by the 3-phases, careful monitoring of load balances between the 3 phases would be required.
Energy not used by the load would be lost into the resistor banks, though this energy could be put to good use - for example running either power station system or domestic heating water through heat exchangers in the resistor banks to heat it up for required usage. Energy could also be diverted into either batteries, or to generate hydrogen to store energy via the electrolysis of water.
If the single generator failed the system would go down. The system would either need to have two generators running simultaneously so that one could continue (at a reduced total output) whilst the failed generator was being fixed, or be able to switch the load supply over to the grid network in the event of a failure.
In the case of a non self-regulating system, someone would have to be paid to oversee supply and demand by operating machine and electronic controls.
The stability of the system voltage and output would be threatened if there were a problem with the water flow.
