.
The dry bulb and wet bulb temperatures would have been used to calculate the frontal position using air mass properties. Behind the cold front there are station readings of both low dry and wet bulb temperatures, for example T dry = 5, T wet=4 (expected for a polar maritime air mass). In the warm sector, they are both much warmer - T dry = 13, T wet=12 as moist air has been advected from the south. 06:00 UTC chart: Western cold front:A clockwise veer in wind direction and an increase in wind speed are expected across a cold front. This was observed between stations 2C (33-37 kts from the west) and 2D (23-27 kts from the south west). It was otherwise hard to observe as a low pressure centre was placed near the front with tight isobars - strong winds. Falling pressure normally precedes a cold front shifting to rising pressure as it passes. This can be observed in the kink in isobars along the front and the shift in pressure tendency from falling to rising (falling at 2D, 2E, 2F, 2G and rising at 2A, 2B and 2C). The front follows the trailing edge of cloud and the heaviest rain: This can be seen in the satellite and radar and also in the weather reports from stations 2C, 2E, 2H and 2I. The stations along the front also have T dry = T wet which corresponds to this rain. Central occluded front and triple point: An occluded front generally 'wraps around' closed isobars at the low pressure centre and has been drawn as such. Conditions around an occluded front are similar to cold fronts. The occluded front follows the line of heaviest rainfall (radar and reports from stations 2J and 2K). There is also a small change in pressure tendency across the front (falling at station 2L and rising at station 2J). However it is hard to distinguish this due to the intensity of the nearby low pressure centre. The front also marks the boundary between cool polar air behind the system and warmer mixed air in the occlusion. Central warm front: The warm sector is warmer and moister than ahead of the warm front. For stations behind the front, 2M, 2N and 2O, the wet bulb temperature is 9-10 oC while at station 2P ahead of the front, the wet bulb temperature is only 6 oC. The air is also drier at this station. There also seems to be an increase in wind speed across the warm front (stations 2M, 2N, 2O and 2P report winds of above 30 kts while the stations to the south of the front report maximum speeds of 20kts. Eastern frontal system: As the system is older, it is much more occluded and so the occluded front is much longer than in the main system. To the north of the occlusion, the air is drier compared to the mixed air inside the 'hook'. (c.f. station 2Q has T dry = 6, T wet=3, while 2R has T dry = 9, T wet=0). The front also follows the line of heaviest rainfall (satellite and weather reports from stations along the front, i.e. station 2S). There is also less cloud inside the 'hook' of the occlusion (satellite and station 2Q). The warm front is placed due to greater amounts of cloud ahead of the front and an increase in temperature from T dry ~ 7, T wet=8 ahead of the front to T dry = 11, T wet=8 behind it. 12:00 UTC chart: The system has now become much more occluded as it develops. The low pressure centre has also moved to the NW. Cold front: Placed through small kink in isobars (more pronounced near the low pressure centre). The pressure tendency is also falling ahead of the front (stations 3E, 3F, 3G and 3K) compared to riding tendencies behind it (stations 3D,3H, 3I and 3J). There is also a clockwise veer in wind direction across the front (stations behind the front, 3A, 3B, 3C and 3D report W, WSW winds while stations 3E, EF and 3G ahead of the front report S, SSW directions). Note the increase in wind speed ca n't be seen as the wind is amplified as it flows along the nearby English Channel. The front also follows the line of heaviest cloud and rainfall, (radar, satellite and stations 3B, 3C and 3E weather reports). Occluded front: This was placed due the satellite showing the distinctive 'hook' shape in this area and the wind speed / isobars. It also follows the line of heaviest rain. Warm front: This was placed along the line of heaviest rain (stations 3L and 3M). There is also an increase in wet bulb temperature behind the front (stations 3L and 3M show T wet~ 9-10 behind the front while stations 3O and 3P show T wet ~ 6-8 ahead of it). There is also a slight kink in isobars and clockwise wind shift (Easterly wind at 3O while Southerly at 3L and 3M).
Please see calculation 1 for full workings. The geostrophic wind was found to be 37 2 ms -1 blowing from the South west and parallel to the isobars at that point. The surface wind was measured to be 18-22 kts ( 9 - 11 ms -1) blowing from SSE. This difference is due to friction in the boundary layer:
From notes, over land, the surface wind is approximately 30% of the geostrophic wind flowing about 30 o to the isobars. This corresponds with the results found.
Please see calculation 2 for full workings. The geostrophic wind was found to be 67 5 ms -1 (error analysis in calculation 2) blowing from the west, parallel to the isobars at that point. This is compared to a surface wind measured as 95 kts (~50ms -1) from the WSW. The difference is again due to friction in the boundary layer. However, as the measurement is over the ocean the friction is much less (no terrain to create friction). Therefore the surface wind would flow at approximately 10 o to isobars and at about 70% of the strength of the geostrophic wind. This again corresponds well to the results found.
This shows the vorticity increasing between 00:00 and 06:00 while decreasing slightly between 06:00 and 12:00. This corresponds to the development of the cyclone. At 00:00, the system had just started to build and therefore would n't be expected to have much relative vorticity. However, by 06:00, the system had developed around an intense low pressure coupled with high geostrophic winds blowing around tightly packed isobars. This would be expected to have much higher vorticity reaching a maximum around the point that the occluded front started to form (as that 's the point with the most energy in the system). The fast development of the cyclone and the speed the fronts moved over the UK also suggests high vorticity. The vorticity was still high at 12:00 although it had dropped slightly, suggesting that the frontal system was starting to lose energy and so lose vorticity. The vorticity is still an order of magnitude higher than normal however, so fast winds are still expected. (these seem much faster around the low in the 12:00 charts due to the centre of the low pressure now being over the ocean, so recorded wind speeds are much closer to the geostrophic wind value). The higher vorticity, the more vortex stretching of the cyclone would be expected to occur so air is pushed aloft and more rainfall would be expected. Heavy rainfall was recorded at the developing low at all 3 timescales however. The higher the vorticity, the faster the fronts would also be expected to move over the UK as the geostrophic winds would be faster.
The relative vorticity is normally ~0.1 planetary vorticity (10 -4) so these values are of the right order of magnitude (it would be expected to get higher values as the storm progresses, especially due to the intensity of the system). There are many errors with this method, especially as it assumes a smooth pressure gradient and a perfectly symmetrical grid.
