Induction generators are simpler, smaller and more robust than synchronous generators, and are not limited by fixed speed requirements. As such, they are increasingly being used in the field of renewable energy. In this experiment, an induction motor/generator was investigated in relation to being applied to hydro-power.
A 0.75 kW 4 pole motor with a synchronous speed of 1500 rpm was used in the experiment.
Firstly, the motor characteristics were investigated with the motor connected to an exterior power supply. Secondly, the characteristics of the motor acting as a generator were investigated, after the motor was disconnected from the grid and a water turbine was used to power the generator.
The motor used was hardwired in a three-phase delta connection, with a line current rating I L of 3.2 A and a line voltage V L of 220 V. The system was set up as shown in figures 1 and 2.
The first parts of the experiment (a - b) were to determine the value of these circuit parameters.
The motor was connected to a three-phase 400V, 50Hz supply, which was controlled with a 3-phase auto-transformer so that the supply voltage could be varied.
In the running light test, the slip of the motor is approximately zero, and so the motor circuit in figure 2 becomes simplified:
With the motor running, the supply voltage was varied between 120 to 260 V, in increments of 20V. At each line voltage V L (V), line current I L (A), total power P total (W), and the motor speed (rpm) were measured. From these measurements, the magnetising curve could be obtained from a plot of V L against I L.
The total volt-amp reaction Q total (VAr) of the motor circuit was then obtained using (1).
Which could then be used to find the magnetisation reactance X m (  ) of the motor: (2).
Where V ph is the phase voltage of the system: for a delta configuration, V ph=V L.
Q ph is the phase volt-amp reaction of the system. In a three-phase system, Q total=3  Q ph.
The voltage stabilisation of a stand alone system depends on the variation of the magnetisation reactance.
R c, the electrical loss in the magnetic core (represented as a resistance), can be obtained using: (3).
Where P ph, the power in each phase of the 3-phase system, is equated to the total power by (4).
This test involved locking the motor rotor, then passing a line current close to the rated value through the system, and recording the line voltage and total power in the system.
The circuit in figure 2 is now approximated by figure 4:
The remaining circuit parameters can now be obtained:
R 1, the stator coil resistance, is determined by (5).
Where R ph-to-ph is the d.c. resistance between two phases.
The rotor resistance, R 2', is then obtained by: (6).
I ph is the phase current, determined by I L=    3   I ph for the delta configuration.
The stator and rotor leakage reactances, X 1 and X 2' are found from: (7).
These two values do not need to be split; they can be considered as one value.
A computer program was then used to produce power/speed, electrical machine efficiency/speed, and current/speed curves for the motor, using the obtained values of the circuit parameters.
The motor was set running at a fixed supply voltage of 220 V, but water was run into the turbine at increasing pressure. The water pressure was increased from 0 - 25 psi in increments of 5 psi, and I L, P total, and motor speed were recorded at each stage.
At the point when the turbine forces the motor speed to become supersynchronous, the motor will become a generator, and P total will become negative.
The motor efficiency, turbine efficiency, and overall system efficiency can then be determined. Motor efficiency can be found from the efficiency/speed curve. The overall efficiency is the electrical power out divided by the power from the water pressure. The turbine water pressure power is obtained from a graph of power/water pressure.
Turbine power is the mechanical power output divided by the water pressure power in.
The motor was then disconnected from the three-phase supply, and run as a generator connected to a three-phase load.
The system is now as follows:
In order to start the motor running, some residual magnetism needs to present in the motor. Capacitors in the circuit are used to excite the machine: resonance between the magnetising reactance X m of the system and the capacitative reactance amplifies the small residual magnetic field.
The volt-amp reactance X m obtained in (2) must therefore be generated by the capacitors if the motor is to run in a stand alone system (provided an external source of rotation - the turbine driven by water flow).
For capacitors in a delta configuration, the value of capacitance C (F) needed is given by: (8).
For a line voltage of 260V, the output frequency of the induction motor is given by: (9).
Where L is the inductance of the system, obtained from: (10) and so the synchronous speed N sync (rpm) (the speed for no load on the motor) of the generator is: (11).
Where P is the number of poles in the generator. For the machine used, P=4.
The generator is run as a stand alone system, with the load in the system being increased in steps. For each load configuration, the water pressure is increased so that the line voltage output becomes 220 V. The line current, power, water pressure and rotation rate were recorded. The turbine efficiency and overall efficiency could then be obtained as in part c).
The machine is operated stand-alone, and a load is connected across two-phases of the system: a single phase load. This load consists of a ballast load controller connected to a variable load: a bank of parallel connected lamps. Each lamp can be switched on individually, increasing the resistive load in increments.
The ballast load controller effectively maintains a constant load on the generator: if the load demand increases (more lamps are switched on) more of the power into the ballast load controller is diverted to the lamps, and less is dissipated by the ballast load controller 's internal resistance. If the load demand decreases, the ballast control increases the load from its internal resistance so that the total load on the generator is constant.
In the experiment, the water pressure was set so that the generator voltage output was 220V. The number of lamps on was increased, and the percentage of the generator power into the ballast load was recorded.
Using equations (1), (2), and (3), Q total, X m, and R c were calculated for the motor at 220 and 260V line voltages.
The graph shows how the current in the system increases with increasing supply voltage. For supply voltages 120 - 200V, the increase is small. For voltages above 200V, the current increases greatly with small increments of supply voltages. This is when the motor has reached its saturation point: the magnetic field will no longer increase in strength despite an increase in supply voltage.
The circuit parameters measured in the locked rotor test are shown in table 3.
R phase-to-phase was measured as 7.6   . Using equations (5), (6), and (7), the stator and rotor resistances and reactances were found to be as follows:
These parameters were put into a program in Matlab, and graphs of power/speed, electrical machine efficiency/speed, and current/speed curves for the motor were produced using the obtained values of the circuit parameters. These graphs can be found in appendix 1. The graphs are based on the assumption that the system is generating, and that the system is grid connected with a synchronous frequency of 50Hz.
The circuit parameters from the load test are shown in table 5. Note how the power in the circuit becomes negative when the motor starts acting as a generator - when the water pressure is greater than 10 psi. Up until this point the line current is roughly constant, and only increases after generation starts to occur.
The three sets of circuit values for the generator (at water pressure 15, 20, and 25 psi) were plotted on the power/speed and current/speed graphs. From these it can be seen that the generator is not producing the expected powers and currents for the measured speed of the motor. The generator is producing less power, but a greater current than expected based on the measured circuit resistances and reactances.
By using the measured line current, and reading off the expected motor speed from the current/speed graph, the generator efficiency can be found from the efficiency/speed graph, by using the motor speed values just obtained.
The turbine input power is found from a graph of turbine power vs. water pressure. (Dorrell, 1997).
The water pressure value from table 5 is reduced by 30% to account for pressure losses in the pipes. This altered value is used to obtain the value of turbine power from the graph. The overall efficiency is then the ratio of the electrical power (from table 5) to the turbine power.
A measure of the turbine efficiency is then the overall efficiency divided by the generator efficiency.
The efficiencies are shown in table 6.
The efficiencies increase with increasing water pressure.
From equations (10) and (8), the capacitor size needed for stand-alone operation of the system was found to be 15.26  F. Three capacitors of this size in delta configuration would provide the reactive power needed for the magnetising branch of the circuit to become excited and the generator to turn, provided adequate water pressure into the turbine. In reality, capacitors of size 18  F are used, as a slightly greater capacitance is needed to overcome losses in the circuit.
For a stand-alone system with 3  18  F capacitors in delta-configuration, the output frequency can be calculated using equation (9). For a line voltage of 260V, this frequency is 56.5Hz, and equation (11) relates this frequency to a synchronous speed of 1695 rpm. This is larger than the synchronous speed for the grid connected system. The operating frequency of a stand alone system will drift more than that of a grid connected system, since this is linked to slip. As can be seen in table 7, the rotational speed of the motor increases with water pressure, and so slip is increasing.
The generator was then run as a stand-alone operation. Load in the system was increased using resistors; for each load configuration, water pressure was altered to maintain a line voltage of 220V. Using the same method as in part c), overall efficiency can be found. The results are in table 7.
The efficiencies from table 7 are shown in figures 7 and 8 plotted against motor speed. No clear curves are visible for the turbine efficiency and overall efficiency since the data set is only four points. It is possible that one of the data sets is anomalous.
For fixed values as shown below, the load was increased in terms of number of lights switched on.
Table 9 shows the % of the power from the generator that is dissipated in the ballast resistor bank. This shows a measure of the efficiency of the system. The more power dissipated in the resistor bank, the less efficient the system is: since less power is being used 'usefully' in the lamps. For a ballast controlled system, it is possible to have 100% inefficiency, if all the power were dissipated in the resistor bank.
The synchronous speed of the motor is about 1500rpm, as can be seen from table 1. The motor speed remains roughly the same while line voltage and line current increase: the power output increases due to the magnetic field strength increase. Table 5 shows how power is generated when the motor is pushed supersynchronous: when the motor speed goes above 1500 rpm.
The overall efficiency of the system is not high, but increases as the motor runs faster. Using ballast load control, the generator can be run at a constant load, however this decreases the efficiency of the system as there is a lot of waste power dissipated in the resistor bank.
