BMI is a simple method to indicate whether a person is underweight or overweight. However the method can not tell us further information about other' body composition to make a further precise conclusion of healthy or not. According to Ursula 2002, "BMI is an imprecise measurement of fat-free and fat mass". It further explained "the weight changes are not related to the changes of the fat mass". One of the good example from Halls 2003, is athletics increase the weight by muscle to over BMI 25 (suggested unhealthy), however, his body fat mass is low. Furthermore, BMI is not precise in some areas such as different age groups and racism. Teenagers usually have higher muscle ratio to fat; while aging people are in contrast, but the BMI remains a stable value during the age changing. Asian people should have lower BMI value to achieve the "overweight" level, some would suggest BMI 23.
The storage of body fat mainly located at the abdomen and hip, therefore three fat body shapes, android (apple shape), gynoid (pear shape) and ovoid (fruit box shape) called. However, fat tissue also store at other parts of body, like the thigh, the trunk and surround the internal organ. Moreover, Waist: Hip ratio is a measure of the central fat distribution (centralized obesity), but it does not measure the blood lipid, (with blood glucose, insulin level) which now consider as a stronger indication of the health rather than using the waist: hip ratio.
Recent study from Lemos-Santos (2004) implied that "the fat location is still in controversies"; and correlation study among the waist: hip ratio, waist circumference and BMI to fatness, the WHR is "less dependent on fatness".
Skinfold measurement is a fair good reproducible method to predict the body fat except visceral fat. It is because the instrument required is comparatively cheap and easily to train to use. Furthermore, Wattanapenpaiboon N. (1998) implied skinfold measurement is slightly better than BIA in estimating % body fat in their study.
To improve the reproducibility, we could increase the number of measurements from five times to seven times, eliminate the largest and the smallest data, then take the average of the five remaining data. Moreover, use two trained testers and each measure four times, remove the largest and smallest from eight measurements and take the average. The relaxation of the patient, technique of the tester are also an advanced.
Four sites or even up to nine sites skinfold measurements greatly increases the accuracy, because fat tissue can varies in different parts of the body. Imagine a labor who usually use his right hand to carry luggage, result the fat mass reduce. Increase the sites of measurement should reduce the bias on one single site measurement. However, skilled and trained tester is very important, because when the measurement is not accurate at four sites, the larger bias gained at last. The formula to calculate the final fat mass is also important, it could compare the answers by using different formula.
The body content is simply divided into two main components, fat and non-fat content. The non-fat content is mainly composed by water. When electric flow through the body, the resistances of fat and non-fat content are different, through the processing, BIA calculates the fat mass content. The non-fat content could be increased by high water content in body. Therefore, intake or excreting water affects the water content in body, which influence the fat mass prediction.
On the other hand, skinfold is a prediction measurement, which mainly influenced by the tester technique; however, BIA is mainly affect by the water content in body.
My TEE data estimated by BIA is lower than formula predicted one. A general estimation of male adult recommend consume 2000-2500 kcal daily, which varies between physical activities, racism and his basal metabolic rate.
Assume my TEE from BIA is more accurate; the TEE from formula prediction had a standard error 156 kcal of male group age 18-29. Thus the formula is based on particular racism group, it could be generated from western diet people, therefore the bias occurs. Moreover, the PAL value is important and it influences the final energy value. In contrast, TEE from the BIA could be influenced due to the water content of user varies time by time, and finally estimate a inaccurate basal metabolic rate.
After meal, activation of insulin leads to synthesis of fatty acids and for further fat storage. The adipose tissues for storage are mainly "white" form, which there are lots of fat cells located at the abdomen. Waist circumference (WC) measuring is mainly at this site of white adipose tissue.
There are several studies suggesting and providing evidence to show the simple way of anthropometry - waist circumference is the best method to indicate the health or risk of disease(s) among waist circumference (WC), waist-to-hip ratio (WHR) and body mass index (BMI). One of the study by Chan (2003) compared WC, WHR and BMI methods to investigate the intraperitoneal and posterior subcutaneous abdominal adipose tissue mass in men. There are totally four sites to examine, which are IPATM, RPATM, ASAATM and PSAATM. 59 men were joined the study, 18 of them are over-weight and the other 41 are obese. This study used Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) to generate a group of data, as a standard, comparing the data with WC, WHR and BMI by statistic methods and generate the final results. Chan (2003) stated "correlational analysis suggests that in men who are on average overweight-to-obese, waist circumference is a better predictor of the distribution of adipose tissue among several fat compartments in the abdominal region". Thus WC had a stronger correlation in ASAATM and PSAATM than WHR; while WC also had a stronger correlation in IPATM and RPATM. Finally, WC showed it is the best among three anthropometry methods by using MRI to make a standard reference for statistic calculation. In addition, Chan (2003) claimed that "WC could be a surrogate marker of the distribution of adiposity in the abdominal region in men." WC is particularly providing a better result in overweight or obese groups, however, other age groups, even other racism groups require more study to give a certain result.
WC is a very simple and cheap method, which the bias is very low and does not require training to start the measurement; Chan (2003) also claimed that is "reliable".
