Different packaging films have different functions due to the properties of packaging materials are varied. In the practical, we intended to research the differences between the films provided by using simple tests and observing the changes of the samples wrapped by different packaging materials during 7 days.
Introduction:
Anon (1988) stated "the packaging as the enclosure of products, items or packages in a wrapped pouch, bag, box, cup, tray, can, tube, bottle or other container form to perform one or more of the following functions: containment, protection and/ or preservation, communication and utility or performance".
Packaging provides a barrier between the food and the environment. And it control light transmission, the transfer of heat, moisture and gases, and movement of microorganisms or insects (Fellows, 1988). Light transmission is employed in packages that are intended to display the contents and provide a platform for labeling. But the light transmission is restricted when foods are susceptible to deterioration by light, such as the oxidation of lipids, loss of color and denaturation of protein. For example low-density polyethylene (LDPE) transmits both visible and ultraviolet light, polyvinylidene chloride transmit visible light but absorb UV light. Packaging should also have certain level of heat resistance, especially when packaging hot food then package shrinking may occur. The permeability of the packaging material to gases and moisture and the packaging procedures employed can influence the type of microorganisms that grow within the package. For fresh food, such as fruit, vegetable and meat, which still respire after harvesting, the water vapor may condense inside the packages if the existed water can not be vapor out of the package that may lead spoilage occur. At the same time, the gases produced by content such as the carbon dioxide, ethylene, have double-side influences. On one hand, the high density of carbon dioxide in the package that can limit the microorganisms growth to achieve the extend shelf-life, on the other hand, the gases may deteriorate or over harvested the food. By researching, the water existing in the package may occur interaction with the certain film and generate hazard compounds when the environment of outside have changed, such the high temperature, high moisture. So the consideration of what kind of materials can run the job for individual food should be prior to the packaging. Another essential property of film is mechanical strength which is the ability of packages to protect foods from mechanical damage had been measured in this practical. The factor of material mechanical strength is influenced by the temperature of material and the length of time that the force is applied (Briston, 1974).
The materials of package are varied. In this practical, we chose paper, regenerated cellulose 350 MS, regenerated cellulose 340 D.M.S, polyethylene, polypropylene, aluminium foil and Cryovac S film whose permeability of water vapor, violate compound and the tensile strength had been tested.
Paper almost used for food packaging is made from wood. Some papers are made from repulped waster paper which increases the incident of contamination of microbes and the paper may give off odors which are likely to cause tainting of the contents (Brennan, 2006). In food manufactory, the coated papers are more commonly used. For example, aluminium coated paper enhance the barrier property of water vapor and gases.
Regenerated cellulose (cellophane) differs from the polymer films in that it is made from wood pulp. It can provides general protect against dust and dirt, some mechanical protection and is greaseproof. When the environment is dry it is a good barrier to gases, but becomes highly permeable when wet. The codes are used to reflect the property of regenerated cellulose films:
D: coated on one side only;.
M: moistureproof;.
S: heat-sealable;.
DMS: nitrocellulose-coated on one side only (Brennan, 2006).
Polyethylene (PE) commonly called polythene which can be divided into LDPE, MDPE and HDPE with different density. LDPE have most widely used in the food packaging due to its strength, low permeability to water vapor and it forms a very strong heat seal. But it is not good barrier to gases oils and volatiles (Brennan, 2006).
Polypropylene is a clear glossy film with good optical properties and a high tensile strength and puncture resistance. It has moderate permeability to moisture, gases and odors, which is not affected by the changes in humidity ((Fellows, 1988).
Aluminium foil is in a good appearance, dead-folding and the ability to reflect radiant energy and an excellent barrier to moisture and gases.
Cryovac S film: Cryovac feature a full range of barrier properties and toughness to meet each product requirements, with added value features such as easy-opening on transversal or end seals, plain, pigmented or printed, taped, non-tapped or roll stock, others provide controlled permeability rates. Value added features, such as easy-opening and re-closing systems, are also available (Sealed Air, 2007).
This test should be carried out using the Stevens machine. The method is most suited to paper and film materials that do not stretch much under stress. The sample is 100 mm length and 25 mm width and 50 micro meters thick. The sample will be extended for a maximum of 100 mm at a rate of 1 mms -1. A recorder will record the data and draw a graph with load against time.
Weigh the dishes which contained dry calcium chloride that can absorb moisture though the packaging materials which cover on the top. After hours, the weights of dishes were varied due to the water vapour permeability different with different packaging materials.
Using Re-cellulose 350 MS, and the same material with different size holes to packaged graph to observe the changes during 7 days.
Using 4 kinds of packaging way involved polypropylene, Re-cellulose 350 MS, Re-cellulose DMS and paper to packaged fresh meat and observe the changes during 7 days.
Using polyethylene and the same material with different size holes to package potato to observe the changes during 7 days.
Using 3 kinds of packaging way involved polyethylene, Re-cellulose 350 MS, foil and Cryovac S film to package cheese and observe the changes during 7 days.
Using 6 kinds of packaging way involved polyethylene, Re-cellulose 350 MS, foil, polypropylene and original packaging to seal chocolate and seal them in a can with mint oil and observe the flavour changes after 7 days.
Note that no alteration was observed on the packages or the fruit inside the first two times (i.e. Wednesday and Friday), but on the last day we observed a slight amount of moisture inside the 350 MS Heat Seal, and an even less amount of moisture inside the 350 MS 8x5 mm.
Both potatoes began sprinting but the package without hole has more sprout than that with hole. 3 means vacuum packaged in PE + heat seal ; then another vacuum packaged with reg. cellulose 350 MS.
Hardness at the end of observation (7 days afterwards): 7   2   1   3   4, 5, 6.
Oiling at the end: 4, 5, and 6   1, 2   3, and 7. Best quality: sample 3.
Worst quality: 6 because of lots of moulds.
Compared the results of three films: polypropylene, polyethylene and Reg Cellulose 350 M.S. Obviously, polypropylene has a high tensile strength and puncture resistance. Its load was 186.47 Newtons which was the highest in this test; the data was similar with the reference value the tensile strength 145-200 Newtons (Fellow, 1988). In test, the polyethylene sample did not tear and the stretch extensibility was more than 100 %.Due to the highly linear arrangement of molecules and the distribution of molecular contributed the flexible, tough tensile strength and puncture resistance of property of polyethylene. Reg cellulose was frail during the tensile strength when the load was 85.2 Newtons, and the stretch extensibility was 8 % which was the lowest in the test. The various properties decide the functions such as polypropylene is thermoplastic and therefore stretches, and has low friction, which minimizes static buildup and makes it suitable for high-speed filling equipment. Polyethylene is suitable for shrink-wrapping.
Using the data collected related to the water vapour permeability of 4 kinds of packaging material to draw a curd. From the trend of curd, it is significantly weight increase of Reg cellulose plain that means the reg cellulose plain had high water permeability that correspond to the reference value that is 400-275 ml m -2 per 24h in 23   85% RH. The weight of dish and content which was covered with reg cellulose increased 12.25 %. Other dishes had not dramatic increase and maintain stable during 7 days. The moisture vapor transmission rate is the main factors that control the shelf life of dehydrated foods. So the reg-cellulose is not suitable for foods that require a complete moisture or gas barrier.
Observing the weight changes of graph packaged by 5 kinds packaging methods, we could find a vivid phenomenon that the graphs packaged in 250 Polyethylene just lose weight about 0.37 %, in another word, the change was minute and the polyethylene is good moisture barrier. There was 2.7 % weight lost from graphs packaged with 350 M.S cellulose without holes, and the data could be explained that some leaks may exist on the seal and caused the moisture vapor exit from package. But when turn to the package made from same material 350 M.S cellulose with hole, the percentage of lost weight were 4.07 % and 3.9% in the packages with 2 mm    5 mm size hole and 8mm   5mm size hole respectively. And the proportion were similar about 4 % weight lost that means the moisture transmission rate can be upgrade significantly when provided holes on the package that is crucial for the contents are sensitive and easy-spoil in humidity environment such as graph, tomato, which will be spoiled on the surface growing microorganisms in a wet surrounding. We also compared the weight change of graph in the same package material, 350 M.S cellulose, with same size hole. But the gage was different. One was sealed normally and another was sealed severe. The weight change were 4.07% and 5.35% respectively, in other word, the effective of proof moisture vapour with different seal method was minute in this practical.
In this practical, we adept fresh meat as the sample to determine the changes involved the discoloration, lose of weight, condensation and spoilage during 7 days with different package films. Normally, the compositions of meat are water, fat, protein and several trace minerals. And the proportion of water is 75%. During 7 days, the paper covering meat lost weight about 44.18%, and meat became dry and contracted. The color of meat changed from cherry red to dark red and although there was not significant green patch found, we could not evaluate the meat packaged in paper that was not spoiled due to the meat was exposed in air where contain lots of microorganisms can lead the meat contaminated. Base on the result, the paper just can package ready-to-eat foods that do not required storage for long period. Polypropylene was good moisture barrier, so even during the 7 days, the weight had no significant change that means there was no moisture or litter moisture go through the polypropylene into environment, at the same time, polypropylene was low oxygen permeability, so the intensity of oxygen in the package was limited that avoided the oxidation interaction inside the package and contributed the quality better than other samples. But we could find lots of water condensed from meat could not be emitted from package that may lead the meat total became green in the second Monday morning. So the polypropylene is not suitable for foods contained lot of water that may lead alternation. By compared the percentages of weight lost of meats packaged by 340 D.M.S reg-cellulose and 350 M.S reg-cellulose were 10.05% and 6.21% respectively. The 350 M.S. 's property is moistureproof that had been proved by the data of this test. But the meat 's quality can not maintain satisfactory after packaging 3 days, some green patches had been found caused by oxygen that can transmission though cellulose into package. The 340 DMS packaged meat had been determined spoil in the 2 nd day. There was a green patch about 1 cm diameter in the center of meat. So cellulose is used for foods that do not require a complete moisture or gas barrier.
Using polyethylene and polyethylene with holes to package potatoes and observed the changes in 3 different environments. No matter in fridge at 4   or in shelf at room temperature or in dark box at room temperature, polyethylene without holes had less water lost, in another words, polyethylene is a good water vapour moisture barrier. The holes on the surface of package accelerated the moisture evaporation that leaded more than 67% weight lose compared with polyethylene without holes. Compared the weight lost in fridge about 4    with the weight lost in room temperature about 25  , the previous had less sprouting than the later, the one reason may be the low temperature decreased the biochemical reaction in the potatoes and prolonged the shelf life and limited respiration rate. The potatoes stored in warm temperature sprouted quickly than in the low temperature and light also contributed the color turn to green.
Compared 6 different packaging material to range the permeability to odours and flavours, we could found, if set no packaged chocolate was the standard of strongest mint flavours, polyethylene was greater than cellulose and polypropylene and foil. In principle, polyethylene should have lower odours permeability than cellulose, I thought the reason contributed the result was the seal of polyethylene was not very hermetic, so the mint odors leaked inside and affected the plain chocolate flavours. The original packaging was good odor barrier which was associated with double membranes including foil and cellulose so less mint odor in the chocolate after 7 days.
In this test, cheese had been package with 5 different methods, and we determined the changes about the sweat, oiling, mould growth and moisture during 7 days. The result showed us that in each package, the cheese all sweated but the changes occurred in different days with different material that means all material have certain level gas permeability, and the vacuum packaged in PE and heat sealed, then another vacuum packaged with reg. cellulose 350 MS over the already packed sample had the less vacuum lose compared with others. Foil packaged cheese grew lots of mould may caused by the leaks between the foil. Cryovac S film packaged cheese oiling at the 2 nd days but Cryovac S film limited the mould growth on the surface of cheese.
