This report presents the result of usability test of which was conducted in December 2006 and the beginning of January 2007.
The study investigates how usable the web service is with the strong focus on customer satisfaction. The intention is to provide the Carphone Warehouse with information how to improve their web site to make it more usable.
The test has been conducted using Heuristic Evaluation Method on the public version of the web site.
The key purpose of the test was to assess the usability of the current web site of Carphone Warehouse.
The test has been carried out with 4 participants who are all experts. Their profile will appear in next section. The method used for the test is Heuristic Evaluation. The experts based on twelve principles of good interface design by Benyon, Turner & Turner.
The test was carried out by participants who fulfilled the following requirements:
Age between 18-50 (the target group of the Carphone Warehouse).
Very experienced Internet users.
Mobile services users.
To avoid having bias I have chosen the equal number of men and women to conduct the test.
Heuristic evaluation is the most frequently used method of usability testing. It was invented by usability consultant Jakob Nielsen. Its aim is to specify the usability issues of the user interface. It has been chosen for conducting the test as it is suitable for all stages of development process, including product review after market release (the case of our test).
In this method a group of experts is supposed to examine the interface according to a standard set of heuristics - evaluation criteria used in usability testing. The experts should have a wide knowledge of human factors and human-computer interface. However it occurs that also those less experiences may report valid usability issues. Ideally the evaluator should also have (besides usability testing experience) understanding of subject matter.
A group of evaluators note down all elements which do not comply with the established usability principles and next put them into the order of descending importance. It is desirable that the experts go through the interface at least twice: first time - to get familiar with the system and second time - to focus on specific interface elements.
This is quick and relatively cheap inspection method. It provides valid and useful feedback for designers how to improve the user interface and what needs improving.
First the criteria for the experts should be established. The criteria should take use scenarios into account.
To make heuristic evaluation successful we must ensure that:
Experts have enough time to become familiar with all essential information concerning the user context and scenarios.
All experts agree on evaluation criteria.
Experts do not communicate with each other during the test, each of them should conduct the test independently.
The experts write down their observations during surfing the web. They are supposed to inspect various elements of the interface and compare them with the list of heuristics. Clearly they are allowed to examine the interface with regard to any additional usability rules. Having completed the tasks they are supposed to prioritize the usability issues. At this stage they can consult with each other.
It has been proved that even a very experienced expert can fail to notice some of the usability issues therefore to achieve better results the test should be conducted by several evaluators. One would think that the more evaluators we hire the better results we get. Unfortunately this is not necessarily true as the benefit to cost ratio starts to decrease rapidly with too big amount of evaluators. According to Nielsen the optimal number of evaluators is 3 to 5.
A typical expert session lasts 1 to 2 hours however in case of large and very complicated interfaces more time might be needed. It is then recommended to have more than one session each concentrating on a specific part of the user interface.
Having conducted the heuristic evaluation we should get a list of usability problems with reference which heuristic has been violated. The evaluators are supposed not only to point the problem but also explain why it is a problem (according to usability principles). It is essential to be as specific as possible.
Basing on heuristic evaluation output it will be easy to redesign the system to make it more usable.
There are numerous different sets of heuristic designed by different usability experts:
This usability test will base on the set of heuristics by Benyon, Turner & Turner (from "Designing Interactive Systems"):
Visibility - it is essential that functions of the interface are easy to notice by the user. The system should also inform the user about its current status.
Consistency - it means that the interface should be the same throughout (use of colours, fonts, layouts). It should also adhere to general standards of similar systems.
Familiarity - in the system user 's language should be applied. We must ensure that all words, phrases and concepts are familiar to the user.
Affordance - it is essential that the users know at the first glance what the product is designed and how to use it e.g. every child knows that buttons afford pressing and knobs afford turning. Some of the affordances are determined culturally.
Navigation - it is crucial for a system to be simple to navigate. The user should easily find adequate menus and links placed in some logical order.
Control - it is important that the user know what control s/he can take, that s/he recognise the control menus and that s/he can see the results of the taken action.
Feedback - the user who receives feedback from a system can assess the results of the taken actions and has a feeling of control.
Recovery - the designer should remember that the future users of the system are only humans and as such they make mistakes. The system should enable quick and effective way to correct them e.g. in case of filling a long form we should enable the user to change the content of just one, incorrect field (e.g. spelling mistake) instead of filling the form from the beginning.
Constraints - the ideal system should not allow the user to perform inappropriate actions. It should also prevent the user from making serious errors e.g. by asking for confirmation. It is highly recommended that system asks for confirmation in case of payments and other money transfers.
Flexibility - flexible systems enable to achieve goals by different means as users from various backgrounds may perform tasks differently. The user should be also given a chance to change the look of the system (e.g. various colour schemes in Microsoft Windows).
Style - the design should be stylish and attractive for the user. It is also essential that the dialogues do not contain irrelevant information.
Conviviality - the system should "behave friendly" and the use of it should give satisfaction. Constant error messages cause frustration and make the user leave the system.
The test pointed out several problems which have been classified into 3 groups in descending order of importance:
Having conducted the test the participants have found a few usability problems. Even though they concern mostly aesthetic issues some of them need immediate attention as they have been classified to major severity group.
Most problems are easy to solve by the web designer - in some cases there is a need only to place additional link. Some are probably just an oversight (e.g. lack of link on "click here" text). In the future the designer should pay more attention to the text on the images.
The service is very complex and is changing quite frequently therefore we assume that at least some of the problems will be resolved in the nearest future.
Heuristic evaluation is a low-cost and low-resource technique which gives broad results. Even though only a few experts are involved it allows finding many usability problems. Most test participants will probably find the same problems, but there will be also some issues identified only by one of them (what justifies the plural number of testers). The experts not only point out the problem but also describe why it is a problem and they suggest the way to solve it.
It is highly advisable to test the system at early stages as it is easier and cheaper to solve problems. However we must remember that even after market release some issues can be solved at low cost (e.g. adding a button, making the link work, changing the colour of menu etc.).
