A computer model was used to characterise the evolution of urban and rural boundary layers. Physical mechanisms are proposed for the observed boundary layer evolutions. Vertical distribution of a pollutant was also calculated for each environment, and links with boundary layer evolution suggested. The practical implications of the findings are considered.
This practical shall investigate the diurnal evolution of the atmospheric boundary layer and the vertical distribution of a pollutant emitted at a constant rate from the surface within the boundary layer. The boundary layer is simulated using a 1D computer model driven by surface sensible heat fluxes and geostrophic winds. The model calculates vertical profiles of potential temperature (  ), pollutant mixing ratio and the east-west (u) and north-south (v) components of the horizontal wind speed. These outputs are displayed on a series of graphs, some of which shall be used within this report. It is also possible for the user to vary certain non-meteorological physical parameters such as roughness length, latitude, and pollutant lifetime.
Within this investigation, most of the parameters shall remain constant. Appendix 1 shows those parameters used to define a rural environment. Alterations to any of these parameters will be explicitly noted within the text of the report.
The model was run using the input parameters as listed in Appendix 1. Figure 1 shows the diurnal evolution of the vertical potential temperature profile as predicted by the model.
Within the boundary layer, structure becomes apparent as shown in figure 1. This is the result of surface emission of sensible heat creating unstable conditions conducive to convective uplift, and turbulent processes arising from vertical wind shear. These two effects combine during daylight hours to promote the formation of large turbulent eddies, resulting in the formation of a well-mixed layer (1) above a convectively unstable surface layer (2). The upper limit of the boundary layer is marked by a sharp inversion in    (3), representing a region of stability inhibiting further ascent of air parcels. Above the inversion is the free atmosphere (4), which is also convectively stable. During daylight hours, progressively more energy enters the system as sensible heat, and so the boundary layer extends upward. At night, the air above the surface is warmer than the surface, and so there is a sensible heat flux to the ground, resulting in radiative cooling of the air. This forms a region of stability near the surface, known as the nocturnal boundary layer (NBL) which inhibits the mixing observed during daylight hours (5). The well mixed-layer remains above the NBL as a residual layer (6), with a gradually weakening capping inversion. Following sunrise, there is once again a sensible heat flux from the surface, and the NBL is eroded by the formation of a new surface layer (7), ultimately forming a boundary layer similar to that of the preceding day.
The height of the boundary layer therefore varies over a diurnal cycle. This is illustrated in figure 2, and arises due the processes described above.
So as to simulate an urban environment, the following values were altered from the values shown in Appendix 1:
The model output is shown in figure 3.
Figure 3 demonstrates that the urban boundary layer is typically deeper than rural boundary layers (figure 2) during the day and that the urban NBL is deeper than the rural NBL, with a weaker stable surface layer characterising the urban NBL. This must be due to the effects of increased surface roughness and/or increased daytime and nightime sensible heat fluxes, as these were the only model parameters altered. The model was re-run for each adjusted parameter so as to attempt to determine how each factor contributes to the evolution of the urban boundary layer.
Increasing surface roughness is analogous to introducing tall urban structures into the model. This modification of the initial parameters deepens the daytime BL typically by approximately 200-300m relative to the rural case. This may be physically explained by the wind shear being vertically displaced (see figure 4a), as surface roughness represents the height at which the horizontal wind speed is 0 ms -1 according to the logarithmic wind profile calculation. This typically occurs at 10% of the height of the roughness elements (Arya, 1999; Holton, 2004). This will result in the vertical displacement of turbulent eddies (see figure 4a). Surface roughness also deepens the NBL, and results in a shallower    profile. This implies that nocturnal radiative cooling of the air is less intense when surface roughness is increased. Physically, this may be understood as the surface having elements that penetrate further into the troposphere. This causes cooling across a deeper slab of atmosphere than observed over a  'smoother' surface. Since there is a greater volume of air being cooled than previously (but at the same rate), the resulting decrease in    is less than that observed for the smoother' surface. Figure 4b illustrates this concept schematically.
The sensible heat fluxes were then changed to the values shown on page 3 whilst holding the surface roughness constant (0.01m). This simulates a lower proportion of surface area covered by vegetation (as would be expected in an urban area), resulting in less emitted energy being used to evaporate water, and thus a higher sensible heat flux. Higher nightime minima correspond to the accumulation of heat by materials in urban environments, which have higher thermal capacities than the natural materials of rural environments (Hogan, 2007). These factors resulted in a deepening of the daytime BL (approaching 2km), and a deepening of the NBL. In this case the higher daytime surface flux creates a more unstable surface layer, promoting buoyancy and thus the production of larger turbulent eddies. The higher value for nightime flux results in less vigorous cooling of the air, and therefore a shallower temperature gradient, implying a weaker region of stability and thus a deeper NBL.
The urban BL characteristics therefore represent the cumulative effects of increasing maximum and minimum heat fluxes and surface roughness. The net effect is a deeper day and nightime BL in urban areas relative to the BL of rural areas.
Figure 5 shows the typical diurnal evolution of the pollutant mixing ratio within the rural boundary layer. These results represent the effects of a long-lived pollutant, using the rural model parameters listed in Appendix 1.
Figure 5 shows that the pollutant is confined within the boundary layer throughout the day, demonstrating that there is negligible exchange between the boundary layer and the free atmosphere. During the day, the pollutant is distributed evenly throughout the depth of the boundary layer (1), with a minor peak in concentrations near the surface (taken as the pollutant source in the model) (2). As the boundary layer deepens throughout the day, the pollutant is dispersed across a greater volume by turbulent eddies, resulting in progressively lower concentrations - for example a typical well-mixed layer ratio of 1.2 g/kg at 1230, compared with a ratio of 1.05 g/kg at 1630 (figure 5). This effect is most notable during the morning. At night, the formation of the stable NBL confines the pollutant within a shallower portion of the atmosphere, resulting in progressively higher concentrations at lower levels as the pollutant accumulates, peaking before dawn (5).
The pollution model was re-run for the urban boundary layer, using the urban parameters from section 2.2, and the same pollutant lifetime as the rural case. The resulting pollution mixing ratio profiles are shown in figure 6.
In the urban case, the pollution concentrations are generally lower due to the greater depth of the atmosphere through which the pollutant is mixed (see section 2.2). During the nightime, the weaker NBL results in a less well-defined surface peak in concentrations than the rural case, with typical values of about half those of the rural boundary layer.
The model used within this study shows that the boundary layer of an urban area is generally deeper than that of a rural area in similar synoptic conditions. This finding is consistent for both daytime and nocturnal boundary layers. This effect is believed to arise as a result of the larger sensible heat fluxes and greater surface roughness that characterises urban areas.
The diurnal evolution of vertical pollution mixing profiles was also shown to differ between urban and rural environments. Concentrations tend to be higher in the shallower rural boundary layer. This effect is especially pronounced in the rural nocturnal boundary layer due to this being significantly shallower than the urban nocturnal boundary layer.
These findings suggest that the urban boundary layer is more efficient than the rural boundary layer at vertically dispersing pollutants, given similar synoptic conditions pollution emission rate (and lifetime) and latitude in both cases. This will have health implications for those susceptible to the effects of pollutants, and suggests that urban residence may be more beneficial than rural residence if health were the only factor under consideration. These findings may also be of interest to planners, suggesting that polluting industrial activities will have a lesser environmental impact in urban areas.
In order to evaluate these findings, it is recommended that pollution dispersion be examined in a 3-dimensional model under a range of synoptic conditions. This would result in a more accurate representation of reality and would test the validity of these preliminary findings.
