Discourse analysis can be broadly defined as the approach to the study of language which aims at investigating how spoken and written texts are organized in order to communicate messages in the social and cultural contexts in which they are produced (McCarthy and Carter, 1994). This interdisciplinary field of study enables analysts to develop models and methodologies to discuss issues of different nature, along the traditions of linguistics, sociology, philosophy, anthropology and others (Schiffrin, 1994).
In the essay, I shall concentrate on the analysis of a written text, the fairy tale 'The white snake' by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, focussing on the micro- and macro-structural patterns deployed to give cohesion and coherence to the text. Moreover, I shall make some considerations about the relations between certain structural devices and the narrative genre of popular tales for children.
Cohesion has been defined as the links among the parts of a text which make the text itself united and meaningful. Several types of cohesive devices ('ties' in Halliday and Hasan 's (1976) terminology; 'links' in Hoey 's (1991) more recent work) have been identified by scholars, who provided a complete taxonomy of the forms employed to hold texts together. In the analysis of the text, I will use the classification introduced by Halliday and Hasan (1976) in their pioneering study on cohesion in English.
The authors identify two main categories of cohesive devices: the grammatical forms and the lexical forms. The former is made up of four subgroups (reference, conjunction, substitution, ellipsis), while the latter is a very productive and rather untidy category that contains elements characterized by sense relations of synonymy, antonymy, hyponymy, meronymy, and others like collocation and repetition. Some examples of grammatical cohesive devices in the text are container in appendix 1.
Intratextual reference, i.e. links between items contained in the same text, is generally a very productive category. This is not surprising, since the employment of pronouns, demonstratives and other grammatical elements is an effective strategy to develop the text in an economic way, avoiding continuous repetitions of the same nominal expressions, which would affect the fluency and would be perceived as non-neutral (see for instance the illocutionary force expressed by insisting repetition in political speech).
Throughout the text many examples of grammatical reference can be found, especially in the use of pronouns (personal, possessive, reflexive, reciprocal, indefinite), possessive adjectives, demonstratives, definite articles, locative and temporal deixis.
Another frequent kind of cohesive ties is conjunction, which include all those expressions useful to make all the relations between ideas and concepts within a text very explicit. Connectors are particularly effective to express the logic and temporal development of a story and they are thus numerous when the intended audience is made up of children. In the tale being analyzed, a large amount of conjunctions can be identified: additive (especially 'and'), adversative ('but', 'however', 'nevertheless', etc.), causative (mainly  'so') and temporal ('now', 'then', 'at the same time', 'presently', etc.).
Substitution is a cohesive strategy through which an item (usually an indefinite pronoun, the auxiliary verb 'to do', comparative expressions like  'so', 'the same') replaces another one to avoid repetition. It is a concept similar to that of reference, but there is a subtle difference. In this case the two elements (the one that substitutes and the one being replaced) are not in a relation of identity, but in a relation of similarity (i.e. they share the same features but they do not refer to the same entity). No examples of substitution have been found in the text.
The last subgroup of grammatical cohesive devices is ellipsis, which is characterized by partial repetition of a previous expression (or a parallel structure) with the omission of some elements. Biberal. (1999: 1099) consider ellipsis "a pervasive feature of conversational dialogue" to avoid unnecessary repetition of what the previous speaker has said, which sometimes leads to the production of non-grammatical utterances (e.g. dropping of the subject and even of the main verb). As far as the written text under analysis is concerned, a common example of ellipsis is the omission of the subject in coordinate verbs, whereas only one example of dropping of larger parts of a sentence has been recorded.
An explanation of the almost total absence of substitution and ellipsis could be again the audience whom the text is designed for. In order to make the story comprehensible to children, the structure of the text is supposed to be clear and without omissions which could create misunderstanding and difficulties in comprehension. Some examples of lexical cohesive devices in the text are container in appendix 1.
As it has been mentioned before, the category of lexical cohesive items is rather complex and untidy, since it embodies a large number of different meaning relations among words which sometimes are not clearly distinguishable. In the text many examples involving several sense relations have been found: synonyms and near-synonyms, antonyms (both converse antonyms such as 'king'/ 'servant' and complementary antonyms like 'guilty/'innocence'), hyponyms and co-hyponyms, meronyms.
Some of the cohesive devices above and other strategies can be grouped under the notion of reiteration, which is defined as the total or partial repetition of the same form (proper repetition) or the same meaning (synonyms or near-synonyms, hyponyms). However, these categories are not enough to explain the great variety of reiterated elements that characterize the text. Some peculiar examples can be better described with the term reformulation, since they combine the simple repetition of words with a paraphrase at the level of the clause (see appendix 2).
Reformulations serve at least two functions in these sentences. The first opposition seems to have a stylistic force, since it provides variation within the text making the story more interesting. The other three examples on the contrary, combine the expressive function of stylistic variation with the functional intent of clarification. Through the reformulations in (2) and (3), in fact, previously mentioned characters are identified avoiding confusion to the reader, while in (4) a complex statement is summarized in a simple and comprehensible sentence, which is fundamental for the understanding of the whole story. Moreover, the insisting repetition of the number 'three' is not random and meaningless, but it can be traced back to the genre of fairy tales, with its frequent use of symbolic features.
The relation existing among the items grouped under the definition of reiteration can be considered a paradigmatic one, since the several forms substitute one another for stylistic or functional purposes. Along with this 'vertical' perspective, Halliday and Hasan (1976) propose a complementary set of cohesive ties which stand on a 'horizontal' and syntagmatic relation. The general term employed to define this kind of relation is collocation, that embodies the idea of co-occurrence of items in the same environment in order to establish meaningful links between the parts of a text.
Sense relations of antonymy, co-hyponymy and meronymy are included in this group and can be considered  'strong' collocations, since they are characterized by well-established semantic links between the words of the lexis. On the other side, interesting examples of 'weak' collocations can also be found in the fairy tale. With this expression I refer to co-occurrences of words which are not frequent in the common use of language, but that create special links when employed in certain contexts. For instance, the two words 'Queen' and 'ring', which are usually loose collocates, cooccur three times in the text (   3 and 4) establishing a connection with cohesive effects. In two cases the relation is one of possession ('the Queen lost her most beautiful ring'; 'the Queen 's ring'), which helps to establish a collocation between the terms, while in the other case there is no evident connection ('a ring which lay under the Queen 's window'). The 'ring' in this last sentence is understood as the 'Queen 's ring' only by virtue of the collocation previously created.
To conclude this section I would like to propose another strategy of cohesion, based on the concept of connotation. An accumulation of terms with positive or negative connotation, in combination with other devices like pronominal reference and lexical relations, can be an effective way to increase cohesion. This strategy is exploited to enhance the linkage between paragraphs 3 and 4 in the text, through a cluster of negative words ('guilty', 'executed', 'in vain', 'no better answer', 'trouble', 'fear') which support the cohesive force expressed by personal pronouns and possessive adjectives.
An alternative perspective to investigate lexical cohesion is embodied in the notions of identity chain and similarity chain (Halliday and Hasan, 1985), defined respectively as a series of expressions that refer to the same thing, event or abstract concept, and a chain of items that point to non-identical members of the same class of things, events or to different classes related to each other. Particularly interesting is the whole range of expressions used to refer to the main character of the story, made up of synonyms, near-synonyms and general noun phrases which alternate according to the features of the context in which the character appears (see appendix 3).
Instances of similarity chains are the numerous expressions used to develop literary themes throughout the text: the theme of travel ('travelling', 'go about', 'ride on', 'wander', etc.); the theme of listening/hearing animal voices ('hear', 'whispering', 'chattering', 'listening', etc.); the theme of tasks to be performed ('attempt', 'hard task', 'perform', 'reward',  'succeed', etc.).
Identity and similarity chains are useful means not only for textual cohesion, but also to create coherence, a property of texts which is strongly related to the receiver 's comprehension of the message. The main conditions needed for a text to be perceived as coherent by the readers involve the recognition of the genre, the competence about its organization and functions, the shared knowledge of the content and the context in which it has developed.
According to Halliday and Hasan (1985) the semantic grouping in similarity chains is genre-specific. This is evident in the themes presented above, which can be considered typical of fairy tales and popular stories. Furthermore, elements such as fixed expressions ('A long time ago', 'they lived in undisturbed happiness to a great age'), proverbs and popular beliefs ('it is said that fishes are dumb', 'one good turn deserves another'), animals with human features, the repetition of symbolic numbers, the use of a certain tense (mainly past simple), help the reader to evaluate the text using the appropriate mental schema: a story written for children with educational purposes (it contains a moral), involving fantastical characters, imaginary places and undefined time in the past.
In this section, I shall move from the micro level of grammatical and lexical cohesive devices to the macro level of clause and sentence relations in order to point out certain structural parallelisms that contribute to hold the text together. The prospective adopted follows the one proposed by Hoey (2001), who provides a model to analyse texts based on the meaning relations between clauses and recursive structural patterns.
The story 'The white snake' can be divided into three main sub-stories which develop chronologically in three distinct settings: 1- the servant lives and works at the court in his place of birth (   1 to 5); 2- the main character leaves the court and sets out to travel around the world (   5 to 8); 3- the young man comes to a city and tries to conquer the heart of a princess (   9 to 15).
The three phases of the plot, although involving different characters and situations, are structured in a similar way. Firstly, all of them have an introductory statement, which helps to collocate the situations in time and space (even if in an imaginary settings). The introduction at the beginning is longer and more elaborated, since it presents the main character and explains a fundamental point for the comprehension of the whole story: how the man received the gift of understanding the language of animals.
Secondly, in the three sub-stories the 'recycling' of a pattern can be identified. The sequence problem - solution - reward occurs many times throughout the text establishing interconnections between the different paragraphs and awakening the interest and attention of the reader. The patterns are not distributed in an even and plain way, but create a climax in the story, which increases in terms of frequency and complexity towards the end of the tale (see appendix 4).
Finally, other interesting patterns develop more locally to serve both stylistic and cohesive functions through the repetition of the structure of the clauses. Winter (1994) proposes two groups of clauses: sequenced clauses, which are logically and temporally ordered; matched clauses, which are characterized by repeated parts and obligatory changes (replacements). An example of the first type is the sequence cause - result which appears several times in paragraph 2, while instances of matched clauses are used to express contrasts (e.g. the sequence hypothetical - real in paragraph 9) or to enhance the moral message contained in the story (e.g. the repetition of the statement in paragraphs 6, 7 and 8).
See appendix 5 for a detailed account.
In the brief analysis presented above some of the properties of cohesion and coherence have been described in relation to a written fairy tale. Several strategies are employed to hold the text together on both the micro- and the macro-structural levels. Grammatical and lexical devices, such as pronominal reference, conjunction, ellipsis and sense relations among words establish effective links between the parts of the text, whereas, at the macro-level of clauses and sentences, it is the recursive pattern of sequences logically and temporally ordered that is responsible for the cohesion. Furthermore, there seems to be an interrelation between the linguistic level (here intended as lexical and grammatical structures) and the genre of fairy tales which the text belongs to. The several strategies exploited not only contribute to the cohesion of the text, but they also help to make it coherent, developing the story with attention to the genre, the audience (mainly children) and the moral message expressed. The recognition of the genre by the reader and his or her competence about the organization and functions of the text are in fact necessary conditions for the creation of a coherent piece of narrative.
