This paper addresses the topics of particularism and generalism, where the main concern is the conflict between these two theories and its evaluation. A particular form of generalism, Ross' deontology is firstly explained in more detail and some examples are given on how the theory is supposed to work in the process of moral judgement. The particularist position and criticism of generalism is taken from Jonathan Dancy 's paper.
Once the theories are defined and more fully explained, the essay presents Dancy 's objection to Ross' deontology. I take a closer look at three, in my opinion, most influential arguments Dancy makes: the argument from examples, holism of reason and argument from enabling conditions.
The second part of the essay evaluates Dancy 's objections to particularism, Brad Hooker 's paper and Sean McKeever 's and Michael Ridge 's paper were used as the basis. The essay ends with some conclusions on the debate where the plausibility of particularism is given some thought.
The main aim of the essay is to establish whether Dancy 's objections create serious problems for Ross' deontology to work, so that we have better reasons to rely on particularism, as it is more plausible. One should note that argument against Ross' deontology also work as arguments for particularism, as these theories hold a completely different view of morality, refuting one makes the other look more plausible.
To begin with, one needs to clarify the position Ross deontology promotes. Generalism, and Ross deontology as a form of it, maintain that "rationality of moral thought and judgements depends on a suitable provision of moral principles", ie that we should understand morality in terms of principles. When an agent faces a moral judgement he ought to look at moral principles, which serve him to decide which action is right or false. Thus it can be said that in generalist perception moral principles serve to connect or to specify the connection between the non-moral properties or features of the situation with moral properties, which are then translated as moral obligations.
Ross, in contrast to absolute generalism, makes a distinction between pro tanto obligations and overall moral duties. When an action upholds a pro tanto duty then it is a pro tanto moral reason in favour of the action. In practice whenever we make a moral decision its overall polarity, i.e. whether it is overall right or wrong, depends on the pro tanto moral reasons that are relevant to the case. According to Ross, to figure out whether an action is overall morally right or wrong, we need to weight the Pro tanto moral reasons against each other. To decide which of the moral reasons count most depends on the circumstance.
Ross uses the term prima facie duties (for more details see Jonathan Dancy, 'An Ethic of Prima Facie Duties', chapter 18 of Peter Singer (ed.), A Companion to Ethics) but this essay will use the term 'Pro Tanto' obligations to avoid possible misunderstanding with other theories.
Now for Ross the polarity of the overall moral judgement varies and depends on the features of the case as they affect which pro tanto moral reasons are relevant. He is then in this sense particularist about the overall moral judgements / reasons. Polarity of the pro tanto reason, on the other hand, does not change and Ross is therefore generalist about pro tanot reasons. This means that a pro tanto reason cannot count in favour of an action in one case and count against, or not at all, an action in a different case. Once a feature counts in favour it always in any situation counts in favour of any action. Ross believes that there are at least five pro-tanto moral reasons. Consequently, what we have overall moral reason to do will always be some sort of a function of these five pro tanto moral reasons.
These are: duty of fidelity, duty of gratitude, duty of reparation, duty of beneficence and duty of non-malevolence.
Jonathan Dancy, "The Particularist 's Progress", in Hooker and Little (eds.), Moral Particularism pg. 2.
Particularism, in contrast, holds a different view of the pro tanto reasons. Particularist stress that pro tanto reasons have essentially variable relevance, i.e. they completely dependant on the circumstances of the situation and a pro tanto reason can count in favour in one case and count against it in different one. This doctrine is called the holism of reason. Therefore, no principle can determine or capture how a feature counts in a case.
Ibid., pg. 2.
The first particularist objection addresses the idea that pro tanto reasons can count only in one way, i.e. either in favour or only against an action. This argument is essentially based on examples where moral reasons change polarity.
In addition, a property producing pleasure is normally a pro tanto reason in favour of an action. However, where an act would produce pleasure for a sadist, it no longer counts in favour of the action, quite the opposite, the pro tanto reason changes polarity and counts against this action. Dancy mentions that one of the reasons against having public hangings would be that it produces pleasure for the people who watch.
Another example where the traditional polarity of a pro tanto reason can switch is the property of keeping promises. Consider when an agent makes a promise to break his next five promises or kill an innocent child. All these promises are essentially immoral and count against an action, which would uphold them. This is however in stark contrast with Ross deontology where a pro tanto reason can have only one polarity. It seems that at least in some examples Ross deontology is wrong to rely on the principles, as they would not correspond to what we would normally consider moral.
Now that we have established that there are examples where the polarity of pro tanto moral reasons changes we can move on to second argument where Dancy tries to prove that holism of reason is valid for moral reasons. This argument rests on two premises. The first one is that holism of reason is true / valid for non-moral reasons, i.e. epistemic and practical reasons. For instance in an ordinary situation, we have good reasons to trust what our senses like perception or taste tell us. However, if we are under influence of psychedelic drugs the fact that we have a certain perception is no longer a reason for believing that the world is as we see it. If we are under influence of a drug that makes blue things appear red, we cannot take the fact that we see a red object a reason in favour of believing that we actually see a red object. Therefore epistemic reasons seem be contingent on the circumstances of a particular case.
Holism of reason holds that "what is a reason in one case may be no reason at all in another, or even a reason on the other side." Cited from.
The second premise establishes the connection between holism of non-moral reason and holism of moral reasons. Dancy 's main reason for that is that "nobody can say with any confidence just which reasons are moral ones and which are not." Since there is no obvious difference between non-moral and moral reasons, it seems more plausible to believe that moral reasons function just like non-moral reasons. "If moral reasons, like others, function holistically, it cannot be the case that the possibility of such reasons rests on the existence of principles that specify morally relevant features as functioning atomistically." Therefore, since Ross' deontology fails to specify why moral reasons should not function just like non-moral reasons i.e. holistically, particularism seems more plausible. , Pg. 4.
Jonathan Dancy, "The Particularist 's Progress", in Hooker and Little (eds.), Moral Particularism, pg. 6.
The third argument against Ross' deontology is based on the idea that in order for some reasons to be reasons at all, they require something / a condition to be in place. Some features act as enabling conditions, "they enable the features that are reasons to be reasons they are in this case, without themselves being among the reasons why the action is right." A good example of this is the idea that ought implies can. This in practice means that when an actor is not capable of actually doing an action he cannot have the moral reason for it. Thus for us to even start considering the morality of an action or the polarity of a pro tanto reason, we first need to have an opportunity to do it. Consider an example where a disabled man sees a drowning person but has no way of actually saving him. If the disabled man would try to save the person, it is very likely that he would drown as well. In addition, a promise under duress would not be considered binding, as the agent was forced into it. A morally binding promise would require the enabling condition that it was not made under duress. Thus we can maintain that there are no moral obligations in these situations and particularist are right to make the "distinction of 'counting in favour' and 'enabling something else to count in favour.'" The enabling condition is therefore not a part of the reason yet affects whether the features even becomes a reason at all. Ross' deontology seems to be mistaken to rely on principles, as they cannot incorporate the enabling condition.
Ibid., pg. 21 , Pg. 10.
The next part of the essay evaluates the argument presented above. The argument from examples seem to show that the polarity if reasons changes in accordance with the circumstances. However, this does not mean that this is a rule and also Ross himself does not hold that all reasons are invariant. He makes a distinction between derived and underived principles. Where derived principles are variable and essentially function of underived invariable pro-tanto moral reasons. Therefore Ross' deontology is not undermined by the giving examples where derived reasons change their polarity.
Yet the presented cases show that even the basic principle of pleasure can change polarity when it benefits a sadist. Some generalists, e.g. Noah Lemos, would maintain that altruistic and sadistic pleasure is intrinsically alike and would argue that other moral properties, e.g. the fact that a wicked person who does not deserve the pleasure gets it, make this act not permissible. This is not a plausible argument as surely "the moral status of the pleasure depends on, among other things, what kind of pleasure it is." This also goes against the common sense morality, as no one would maintain that sadistic pleasure is essentially a good moral property.
Brad Hooker, "Moral Particularism - Wrong and Bad", in Hooker and Little (eds.), Moral Particularism, pg. 6.
Brad Hooker, on the other hand, accepts that sadistic pleasure counts against an action. This however only establishes that there are different types of pleasure, where non-sadistic always counts in favour of an action.
A similar argument can be made about the promise-keeping example. Since the promise offends against other obligations, an agent has no moral reason to keep it. Thus, the distinction can be drawn between immoral promises or promises made under duress and promises not offending against other obligations. When the latter type of promise is involved, it is always a moral reason in favour of an action. Therefore, the examples do not establish that underived pro tanto reasons can switch polarity, as Ross' deontology can always respond by making the principle and therefore also the reason more specific.
Generalism also responds with examples, which undermine the particularist theory. Brad Hooker produces examples of pro tanto reasons, which always count in the same way, e.g. "killing of a conscious human being who is not threatening others physical security." However, these reasons look all but simple. No Dancy seems right to point out that "invariant reasons should there be any, will be invariant not because they are reasons but because of their specific content." However, these complex reasons are not what we would normally use when making a moral judgement. "The whole enterprise of defending one 's reasons by complications begins to look strangely irrelevant, and its products unnecessary.".
Ibid, pg. 8.
Jonathan Dancy, "The Particularist 's Progress", in Hooker and Little (eds.), Moral Particularism, pg. 6 , Pg. 10.
The second argument concerning the holism of reason has at least two possible replies. Firstly, Brad Hooker attacks the first premise that epistemic, practical and moral reasons are holistic, in particular that the example with psychedelic drugs does not hold. This is because in the given situation there is additional reason why we believe that what we see is really as it seems, in this case that a red looking object really is red. The additional reason is the belief that we are under normal conditions. This however alters once we are conscious of the fact that we took a mind altering drug. Therefore, the argument given does not establish that epistemic reasons are holistic.
Yet moral reasons can be holistic as Hooker only refutes the version of argument presented above. Moral holism seems to hold in theory of choice. Dancy gives the example where he has several options of action but none of them is painless. In a situation where no painless alternative is present, pain is no longer a reason against an action. Therefore, the alternatives present in a situation affect the status of a pro tanto moral reason. This example at least seems to back the holism of moral reasons.
Another way to argue against the example is to maintain that the given reason is not a good enough complex feature to be taken as a reason for or against something. This would however fall to the trap mentioned earlier where Ross responds to particular examples by making the principle and the pro tanto reason more specific.
McKeever and Ridge make the second reply that holism of reason is consistent with Ross' deontology. As long as we can codify the circumstances, i.e. we can make a finite list of them, "Ross' denotology when suitably restated might cohere with holism of reason." Therefore, "holism itself provides no reason to suppose that context dependence cannot be codified in finite and useful terms.".
Michael Ridge and Sean McKeever, "What Does Holism Have To Do With Particularism?", Ratio (2005), Pg. 100.
And in case a stronger version of holism is presented, i.e. "the context dependence of reasons cannot be specified in finite or helpful propositional way," Ross can argue that this in fact begs the question, as this version of holism is basically a negation of generalism, thus argues in a circle. Therefore, "holism is compatible with the view that morality can and should be codified.".
Ibid., Pg. 96.
But as we try to codify the circumstance in which a feature is always a pro tanto moral reason, we again make the reason too complex. Dancy holds that the circumstance are essentially infinite, as we can always add one more feature which would switch the polarity, and therefore not codifiable. All the examples given by particularism are essentially a prove of it. Thus McKeever 's argument ultimately fails.
The argument from enabling conditions can also have some possible replies. Proponents of Ross' deontology can try to appeal to the idea that the reasons in question are not complex enough and that the conditions can also be incorporated in a reason. However, this way of reasoning goes against common sense morality as no one would maintain that a part of the reason for helping someone is the fact that I can do so.
This paper started with elucidating both Ross' deontology theory as well as a brief statement of what particularists believe, i.e. in what way they differ from each other. Three most important objections to Ross' deontology are explained in more detail and some examples are given on how they are supposed to work in practice.
In the main part, the essay evaluates the objections and replies made to them by Brad Hooker and McKeever and Ridge. It seems that the argument from examples does not really refute the theory as also Hooker is able to produce counter examples to particularism. The second argument from holism of reason is initially refuted however other examples Dancy produces make the point that pro tanto moral reason are holistic seem more plausible. Also McKeever and Ridge  's argument that holism is consistent with codification of circumstances qua principles does not seem to hold. Also the argument from enabling conditions shows that the circumstances are more complex than Ross originally assumed and that some circumstances, can only hardly be incorporated into a pro tanto reason ergo the pro tanto duty.
For the lack of space and time, this paper could not address some other objections particularist have made essay, e.g. the epistemic problem generalist have when trying to give a plausible account of the connection between natural properties and moral principles.
Also the question remains whether generalism and particularism also differs in practice, in overall judgement, from what particularist believe. Whether a Ross' deontologist would at some point make a different moral decision from a particularist. A possible answer would explore the fact that in Ross' deontology, what we have overall moral reason to do will always be some sort of function of these five pro-tanto moral reasons mentioned above.
It seems that Dancy makes a strong case for siding with particualrism rather than with Ross' deontology, as there are too many problems for a principle based approach to ethics to work. Ultimately, particularism seems more plausible than generalism.
