Organic produce available for the UK 's general public has, in recent years increased and nowadays is a common phenomenon. Reasons for apparent interests in this market of food are mixed, however the market is here to stay, and will probably in the next few years continue to grow, if the demand remains. The following points are the intended outline for this report in which the organic sector will be appraised and suggestions for biocontrol put forward.
The amount of organically certified land has grown by over 1000% since 1997, from 60,000ha to over 688,373ha, including land in conversion. The organic market overall has grown from   100 million to   1.12 billion between 1993/94 and 2003/04 and in the year 2003/04, organic sales grew by 10.2%, equivalent to almost   2 million a week (Green, 2004). These figures are impressive and to suggest that the organic market will continue to grow is realistic. In a recent report by Horne, (2006), the quota for organic milk alone is said to increase by 25% a year for the foreseeable future, with the sector having gone from 7m litres (1995/96) to 300m litres (2005) of milk per year. So why are people so interested in buying organic food? Work carried out by Jones & Tranter, (2004) compiled data from a number of countries in Europe using focus group studies and found that, for the UK, 17% of the people surveyed regularly bought organic food and 44% bought sometimes. The level of understanding of organically produced products was, in most cases, shallow or nonexistent, except for Denmark, which has the most mature organic market and consumers, accordingly, have the deepest knowledge and understanding of what they are buying. When asked the reason for buying organic, the majority said either for environmental or health reasons, the latter, together with food safety, was an important issue for pregnant mothers or young children. The common response by all who were surveyed across Europe mentioned the environment and therefore an implicit erroneous assumption of restricted use or complete absence of chemicals. There are two fundamental misconceptions in this response - firstly, there is occasional, last resort use of pesticide sprays, principally copper, sulphur, natural pyrethroids, and derris, Shepard (2003) and secondly the misguided association of 'unnatural' with 'harmful', when actually there is no relationship and it is known that some natural chemicals are very harmful compared to some unnatural chemicals that pose a lesser threat (van Emden & Peakall, 1996). Therefore, it seems that the logical way forward is to educate the public to the realities of organic food production through the use of advertising, factual information leaflets, and labelling of food products. A cogent example is the Sheepdrove enterprise based in Lambourn, Berkshire, which has two farm shops and an informative website which explains their method of production and provides appropriate recipes. (Sheepdrove organic farm, 2003).
A formal definition of biological control is a method of controlling pests and diseases in agriculture that relies on natural predation rather than the introduction of chemicals (Wikipedia, 2006). Increased awareness of the chemical inputs used for controlling pests and diseases in agricultural and horticultural enterprises has, since the publishing of Rachel Carson 's Silent Spring, been the driving force behind what could be termed as today 's 'environmentalism'. Carson 's holistic view for the development and use of powerful chemical pesticides, insecticides and herbicides, such as DDT, highlighted the problems associated with their over use in the industry, resulting in resistance, toxic residues on food, soil and animals, undesirable deaths of nontarget organisms and damage to the environment (Emden & Peakall, 1996).
With the general public 's view on farming and it 's effect on the environment (sometimes irrational and uninformed), it may then be a quick assumption that biological control would be a good thing to integrate into the organic system of agricultural production found in the UK today. However, little information can be found regarding this integration in the literature, for reasons explained later.
Hodges (1982) defines organic agriculture as "a system of agriculture that attempts to provide a balanced environment, in which the maintenance of soil fertility and the control of pests and diseases are achieved by the enhancement of natural processes and cycles, with only moderate inputs of energy and resources, while maintaining an optimum productivity." Whereas Lampkin (1990) defines organic agriculture as "a production system which avoids or largely excludes the use of synthetically compounded fertilisers, pesticides, growth regulators and livestock feed additives. To the maximum extent feasible, organic farming systems rely on crop rotations, crop residues, animal manures, legumes, green manures, off-farm organic wastes and aspects of biological pest control to maintain soil productivity and tilth, to supply plant nutrients and to control insects, weeds and other pests." These two definitions both share the aim of growing crops and raising livestock with non-reliance on man-made, synthetic inputs and agree that the requirements for crops and livestock should be sourced 'naturally'. However to successfully achieve this and expect the same results as conventional farmers is not possible. Due to the restrictions organic farmers face on inputs, problems arise in combating disease and the following from Lampkin (1990) highlights other difficulties:
Following the restructuring of the farming subsidy scheme between 2002 - 2004 (entry level, organic entry level and higher level), the options for growers to go organic has been widened and the money being provided through the subsidy, for all stewardship schemes, is better targeted towards environmental farming practices. The list of options available for farmers on the organic scheme (OELS) includes buffer zones, hedgerow management, beetle banks, under sowing cereals, and conservation headlands, Defra, (2005). It is clear from the above that the potential for biocontrol is present, as beetle banks and conservation headlands are known to host natural predators which could be exploited for control of pests in the crop, and the correct choice of species sown in the headland could attract pests out of the crop and provide alternative food for predators (Root, 1973). This method of biocontrol can typically be termed as 'conservation biocontrol', as this is the creation and improvement of habitat for hosting already existing pests or predators, contrasting with the actual application or addition of biocontrol organisms, which would be brave in broad acre agriculture as the effects would be unpredictable and questions would be raised regarding the economic viability and environmental safety. Thus, the use of this technique in glass houses has more application due to a more confined, controlled and protected environment. Therefore, a lack of information in the literature for biocontrol in broad acre agriculture can be understood, however some work regarding conservation biocontrol has been carried out, but not in the UK. Work in east Africa investigating stemborers and striga in maize crops has shown remarkable reductions by planting Napier and Sudan grasses around the crop and intercropping plants such as Desmodium spp. and Melinis minutiflora. The stemborers are attracted by the surrounding grasses and repelled from the crop by Desmodium spp. , resulting in a 'push - pull' system, which also provides suppression of Striga, which is a parasitic weed. The results of this project speak for themselves, with increased maize yields of between 18-25%, Khan, (2005), demonstrating what can be achieved when enough is known about the ecology of the target pest.
One attempt at controlling slugs in broad acre agriculture by the application of nematodes has been tried in Holland. The nematodes they used were Phasmarhabditis hermaphrodita, and the application was by walk through broadcasting in some fields and a helicopter boom over the crop in other fields. The crop in this instance was Brussel sprouts and the findings of these trials found that after 2 applications of 500 million nematodes per hectare, combined with 4 applications of Ferramol at 25 kg/ha, (this combination saving 6 applications of Ferramol, a low environmental impact slug bait), sufficient slug control was achieved at little expense (Ester et al. 2006).
In a recent study carried out by Prasad and Snyder, (2006), it is mentioned that few studies have been undertaken to investigate whether or not the conservation of natural enemies, through the use of beetle banks, improves pest control. Not only is this the case, but the ecology for some of the most common species of interest in an agricultural context is not known, Holland et al. (2005). The observations mentioned from the study of Prasad and Snyder, (2006), were that the presence of a beetle bank, on land managed organically, does increase the number of beetle species populations. However, it was shown that although the number of beetles increased, the predation of fly eggs over the growing season was n't affected and the reality was that larger beetles were predating smaller beetles. A study carried out by Thomas et al. (1991) showed that the emigration of Demetrias atricapilus from such beetle banks were successful, with beetles found 60 metres from the origin and the apparent control of pests was positive. Another study carried out by MacLeod et al. (2004) concluded that over the period of study, the investigated beetle bank maintained its role in providing over-wintering habitat for polyphagous predators and that carabid beetle diversity increased since the bank had been established. This is all very well, but little is known about the affect of the presence of these enemies and whether or not they provide sufficient pest control. Therefore from the above, an organic farmer may chose the option of a beetle bank for his OELS payment, thereby increasing the densities of beetle populations on which he was relying for the control of his pests. However, fly egg numbers may not be reduced sufficiently to persuade the farmer of the benefit of a beetle bank. For such a method to be employed as an option in the OELS seems questionable, not that it is a bad thing, but that the reason for it being there is more idealistic rather than quantifiable. More specific studies therefore need to be funded to investigate the most efficient way of using these techniques and for information of the individual beetle species to be collated, so that the best, and desired results can be obtained. Funding for such projects is not readily available however due to chemical companies wanting to maintain sales of their products and therefore retain their economic viability.
Not only do organic farmers have crop problems to deal with, but also livestock problems, a major one being parasitic worms in sheep (Nematodirus battus, Ostertagia, Trichostrongylus and Nematodirus species). The techniques for overcoming this problem without the use of medication are:
Animals that become sick or injured and for whom none of the above methods are effective, must be treated by first using medicinal products that comply with organic farming principles; (plant extracts or plant, animal, mineral products). If these products do n't work & the animal is in distress or is suffering, chemically synthesised medication may be administered, a record made and there is a legal 'withdrawal' period (28 days).
Organic farming is a more responsible way of farming, however, the 'red tape' and the structure which has been developed seems to have been formulated from behind a desk, rather than quantified and thought through from farm level. This lack of flexibility makes integration difficult.
Integrated Farming Systems (IFS), Integrated Arable Farming Systems (IAFS), Integrated Crop Management (ICM) are all, in essence the same thing, where the focus is to combine traditional methods of farming with modern technology. A "best of both worlds" scenario could be assigned to this method of agriculture, as it lies between conventional farming and the recognised organic approach to farming. Farmer et al, 1994 defined this method of agriculture as: "a holistic pattern of land use which integrates natural resources and regulation mechanisms into farming practices to achieve maximum but stepwise replacement of farm inputs, to secure quality food and to sustain income." LEAF (Linking Environment and Farming) is one of the organisations at the forefront of this scheme and promotes various principles of IFS. These include; a commitment to good husbandry and animal welfare, efficient soil management and appropriate cultivation techniques, the use of crop rotations, minimum reliance on crop protection chemicals and fertilisers, careful choice of seed varieties, maintenance of the landscape and rural communities, and an enhancement of wildlife habitats (LEAF, 2006).
The system is composed of 4 main areas; fertiliser usage, pesticide usage, cultivation methods and rotations. Individually, these are familiar approaches to farming, however IFS aims to implement changes in all these areas and thereby join up the thinking behind each approach to form a well balanced and systematic method for agricultural production. Figure 1 expands upon the 4 main areas stated above. Fertilisers and pesticides are permitted and there are no restrictions as to which kind are used, (unlike the organic system), but the application is reduced. Park et al 1997, outlines the concept of 'Threshold Spraying' as a technique for reducing the amount of fungicide and/or pesticide used. Threshold spraying is based on close crop monitoring so that application takes place at the most appropriate time, when a disease or pest is present, thereby reducing the use of prophylactic spraying.
IFS are more complex than conventional systems, due to the greater variety of crops, related diseases and pests to contend with. Threshold spraying relies on more crop walks, as a higher dose of spray will be required if a threshold is exceeded, more so than if a low dose prophylactic spray had been used (Park et al. 1997). Therefore there is a higher degree of risk involved. However, to hypothesise for a moment; if the options suggested in the OELS are adopted and integrated into this system of agricultural production, there could be potential benefits all round with the inclusion and conservation of natural enemies to aid crop pest protection, as stated in the above examples, therefore attaining to the threshold philosophy for pesticide inputs and using these chemicals in a manner which complements the biological control. By spoken word of Helmut F. van Emden, (2006) the suggested ratio between biological control and the use of complementary chemical input was estimated to be 70:30, whereby sufficient protection through the use of biocontrol was insured through the use of some chemical input.
In conclusion, it has become clear that the organic system of agriculture is n't wholly accommodating, and a more holistic method of integrated farming will prove a better suited system for the introduction of biocontrol measures. The nemaslug example proved that biocontrol can be successful and economical, but to fully utilise the benefits of biological control, further funding is required so that the ecology of these biocontrol agents can be discovered and implemented in either conservation or broad acre agriculture application.
