Virgil uses the Aeneid to showcase an exemplary Roman character, whose qualities and characteristics were inherently considered ideal for a Roman citizen, and so act as a role model for both citizen and leader alike. Williams sums this up in his pr  cis of the heroic character in his book Aeneas and the Roman Hero: (Williams 1999:28).
Virgil takes the story of the founding of Rome and writes it using the popular media of epic poetry, both embracing and modernising Homeric technique in order to create a new type of hero relevant to a Roman society. This Roman hero would have to adhere to Roman virtues and reflect the Roman ideal; being pious and devout (subservient to the gods and his fate); bound by duty; devoted to family and country; and emotionally controlled. These traditional values were appreciated by both Virgil and Augustus, who passed laws that "set limits to expenditure, encouraged family life, penalised sexual laxity." A most important feature is the idea of pietas, a Latin word used to encapsulate a devotion to all virtues; the gods, family, and country. Aeneas fulfils these through being a devoted father and son, a devoutly pious man, putting the future of Rome above all personal desires and remaining committed to his destiny. In this way, Virgil is able to portray the importance of loyalty to the Roman state, an importance of morality and virtuousness, and a sense of emotional peace and control that all Romans (including Augustus) could aspire to. Comparing it to Greek models of heroism can help to enhance our view of Aeneas' Roman characteristics, but can also show similarities between them, occasionally bringing to the surface some of Aeneas' more Homeric tendencies. On the whole, Aeneas can be regarded as a predominantly Roman hero, however I believe Virgil highlights certain elements of Aeneas' character that are more Homeric and as such, unsavoury to a Roman audience. It could be that Virgil is trying to illustrate human weakness, and although maintains an ideal to aspire to, realises that we can never completely achieve it. (Williams 1999:15).
We can also examine what would define Roman heroism and compare it to that of Homeric (Greek), however Virgil 's presentation of his Roman hero is modelled on Homer 's idea of the epic, and so similarities are frequent. Most often born of mortal parents, Roman heroes would be given a quest in which they must remain pious and devoted Roman citizens. Obstacles would be presented in the form of other mortals rather than the mythical creatures of Greek epic and must remain loyal to their country and cause. Greek heroes, by contrast, would be semi-divine, and fulfilling quests for personal glory and reputation. Aeneas bridges the two definitions in this instance, as he is semi-divine (Venus is his mother) and although his main enemies are mortals, fights a mythical being as well. He is presented as a rather more selfless leader than that of Greek epic, devoted to his quest for the greater good of the future of Rome. Although in regards to traditional Roman heroes he shares characteristics with the presentation of Greek heroes, observing Aeneas' Roman characteristics within his heroism is rather more successful.
Virgil 's Roman heroism is at odds with the Homeric heroism of the Odyssey and Iliad. The ideals of Rome are reflected in the heroism that Virgil depicts in the Aeneid, emphasising family, piety and duty. As a result Aeneas is a rather different hero to Odysseus; Virgil intends to reflect Roman ideals to portray a model Roman citizen and encourage national pride, whereas the Homeric heroes are rather less human, and are self-serving and glory-seeking, portraying supremacy. Gransden summarises his heroism in describing him as 'willing and ready to subordinate his individual will to that of destiny, the commonwealth and the future, reluctant to fight and not really interested in victory.' Aeneas has some instincts of a Greek hero (these are most clearly illustrated in Books 10, 11 and 12 where he is fighting against Turnus and the Italians, upon hearing of Pallas' death and ruthlessly taking human sacrifices in anger, ((a reflection of Achilles in the Iliad when he is revenging Petroklos' death)) and upon killing Turnus when he should have showed mercy) but he has to countermand these in favour of Roman values and a selfless duty to the future state of Rome. Aeneas has to consider the future of an entire race of people and retain his devotion to his quest to found Rome, a far less selfish hero than that of the Homeric kind, where victory is motivated by personal glory. (Gransden 2004:89).
Aeneas cannot be an individualistic and selfish hero. Williams explains that he has to be 'the social man', always concerned with the good of his people in order to achieve the destiny of Rome. He has to be aware of his responsibility to his duty which includes looking out for the welfare of others without submitting to his own desires or becoming selfish and self-important. Aeneas is often described as being 'pius', (pietas is the noun) a Latin word encompassing the qualities aforementioned. It is a concept that was a vital Roman virtue, and is probably Aeneas' most treasured quality from an Augustan perspective. Pietas incorporates an immovable devotion to the gods, ones family, ones friends and one 's country (reflected in his unshakeable dedication to achieving his destiny of founding Rome). Pietas can be coupled with the idea of self-sacrifice, another quality which Aeneas is in possession of that is notably Roman. This could be said to be a reflection of Augustus' interest in Stoicism and its "strong emphasis on duty, and a stern, self-denying self control...ready to suffer and obey." His dedication to the quest, and his duty, forces him to sacrifice his personal life for the benefit of future generations and follow his divine duty to the best of his ability. This is particularly illustrated in Book 4 when he abandons Dido to her fate after their love affair in Carthage: (Williams 1999:30) (Williams 1999:30-31) (Blaiklock 1961:18).
A major aspect of Virgil 's heroism is to show Aeneas as both heroic and human. Aeneas is a good, strong leader, as is the case for Greek heroes, but also suffers from moments of self-doubt and depression:
Williams 1999:44).
He exhibits characteristics which humanise him, enabling Virgil to communicate to a contemporary audience the accessibility of Aeneas as a role model. Homeric heroes are typically semi-divine, self-assured and single-mindedly determined to succeed. In order to be perceived as great beings they need little human weakness, and this sets them apart from the general public. In contrast, Virgil 's Roman hero is shown to be inherently human, despite Aeneas having a divine parent, and as such can act as a vehicle for Augustus and the Roman government to portray the model Roman citizen. The model Roman citizen however, requires Aeneas to become detached and prohibits emotional involvement, which could be said to dehumanise him. During his visit to the underworld he exhibits a newfound stoicism:
His subsequent self control and total devotion to his destiny are characteristically Roman; this is juxtaposed, however, with his human weaknesses early on and at the end of the poem, exemplifying how someone who is intrinsically human should master his emotions in order to fulfil the will of the gods and his destiny.
It is Aeneas' destiny to found Rome. He is unable to follow his own will if he is to follow his destiny. This is exemplified in book 4 where he has to leave Dido in order to pursue his destiny in Italy and explains that "it is not by my own will that I search for Italy." (Book 4, p79) It seems to be a characteristic Roman feature - to put duty to Rome above personal desires and to follow a supreme destiny as opposed to a personal quest. Despite Aeneas' seeming desire to stay with Dido, he still proves his dedication to his greater cause by suggesting to her that he had no intention of lingering in Carthage and that his love lies with the future of his Trojan people. He also backs his argument with the simple fact that leaving Carthage is beyond his control; the gods had demanded his devotion to the future of Rome. Despite his claims, he has the choice as to whether or not he follows his destiny, and it is by his own will that he pursues it; it is the content of his destiny he has no control over: (Camps 1969:23).
The gods come to his assistance throughout the epic and help him to achieve settlement of the Trojan people in Rome, and always encourage him when the quest is neglected or being threatened with abandonment. Aeneas' devotion to the gods is a Roman ideal and divine intervention is key to his success.
Turnus' furor juxtaposed against Aeneas' pietas exemplifies the different ideals of Homeric and Roman heroism. Turnus represents the Greek mould of hero, exhibiting obvious physical prowess, energy and violence, a merciless individualist who fights for his own personal glory and gain. Aeneas, on the other hand, is controlled, previously self-doubting but by the climax of the poem in possession of a quiet and assured strength, and fights in fulfilment of duty and destiny. Aeneas does not choose to fight, but Turnus is more than willing to resort to violence to obtain grandeur. Virgil engages the use of stock epithets to attribute particular characteristics to individuals and these can be used to identify the heroic differences between Aeneas and Turnus. Aeneas is frequently referred to as 'just' and 'good', and of course 'pius', the Latin word which encapsulates his pietas - his devotion to duty. The epithets prescribed to Turnus reflect the Homeric heroic model: 'proud', 'bold', 'violent', 'frenzied', and 'burning', with particular reference to his 'furor' - wild and passionate heroic anger. (Williams 1999:56-7).
Aeneas' moment of heroic furor in which he savagely kills Turnus is among his most Homeric action in the poem. Virgil appears to attempt to depict Aeneas as displaying Roman ideals, but in places, such as Turnus 's death, Aeneas shows signs of Greek heroism. Although he becomes more of a Roman hero throughout the Aeneid, Turnus' death at the end of the work exhibits Aeneas at his most Homeric in terms of heroism. When Aeneas gives in to his anger and kills Turnus, the fact that it has lead to the completion of his destiny can be seen as an event where the end justifies the means: (Van Nortwick 1992:170).
Aeneas is able to express emotion and take revenge upon Turnus because he knows it will not interfere with his destiny and the good of the future Rome, and so can submit to his humanity. This is not to say however, that Aeneas' moment of emotional weakness can be excused, as it is so important for Aeneas as a reflection of a Roman ideal to control the passions of his emotions. If he is to give in to his fury, as he does here, then he jeopardises the vision of a Roman future where the civilisation Aeneas brings will stamp out the archaic need to give in to violent emotion and chaos. Perhaps Virgil intends to present this dilemma to a contemporary audience to reflect the nature of the human condition, and to illustrate that we can only suppress our impulses so far. The Romans can bring civilisation, but not to a full and all-encompassing degree.
In conclusion, Aeneas is very much Roman hero, encapsulating Roman ideals of pietas, being presented as accessibly human and as a result subject to weakness and lapses into Homeric characteristics. He remains dedicated to his destiny no matter what the cost, however, his attempts to check his emotions and control his furor are often compromised, and the vision of Rome as a civilising force where emotional control is key to peace is proved impossible to achieve completely. Aeneas may be characteristically Roman by majority, but Virgil seems to prove it impossible to completely adhere to Augustan ideals, perhaps a reflection of his view of Augustus' visions for the future Roman Empire, or indeed human nature in general.
