Dehydrated beans were provided. They were soaked in water. It was drained and weighed. (Weight 1900 grams approx.) The beans were blanched in hot water for 10 minutes. One litre of two types of basic sauces was prepared by using the given recipe. The beans were filled into the cans by using two different weights 120g and 150g respectively. About 10 cans of each were filled both recipes of sauces. It was clinched first (half sealed) and exhausted for 5 mins. The cans were sealed by suing the can seamers and checked for seal integrity. The cans filled with peas and sauce was then transferred to a simple vertical batch retort for sterilising the cans. The aim of sterilising is to achieve commercial sterility.
A temperature of 120  C was carefully maintained for 60 minutes was achieved. The two key features are that the temperature and pressure are independently controlled, and that a mechanical fan provides for continual mixing and circulation of the mixture of steam and air within the retort cycle. The input of steam is used to control temperature and the input of compressed air controls pressure. The action of the fans effectively draws the steam-air mixture through the crates of cans before re-circulation around the inner walls of the vessel.
One of the keys to reducing the thermal damage to products during manufacture is the shortening of the heating and for that matter cooling, times associated with the process. It is clear that the current trend is to minimise the thermal impact of food processes. The heat process is however still and essential element and likely to remain so. This has led the growth in products that have been specially formulated to require a reduced, pasteurisation heat treatment to render them commercially sterile.
Raw material yields are reduced by the removal of defective and unacceptable product. During the preparations, the raw materials are vulnerable to microbial contamination and growth, which results in spoilage and lowering process.
Raw materials should be protected from contamination by human, animal, domestic, industrial, and agricultural wastes that may be present at levels likely to be a hazard to health. They should not be grown in areas where the water used for irrigation might constitute a health hazard to the consumer of the final product.
Control measures involving chemical treatment, physical or biological agents should only be undertaken by or under direct supervision of a personnel who has a direct understanding of the potential hazards to health , particularly those that my arise from residues in food. Harvesting and production equipment and containers should be constructed and maintained so they do not constitute a hazard to health.
Raw materials that are unfit for human consumption or unacceptable for canning should be segregated at the harvesting and /or production sites and disposed of in a manner to avoid contamination of the raw materials or water supplies. They should be stored under the conditions that provide protection against contamination or to the objectionable substances and minimize damage and deterioration.
All steps in the production process should be performed as rapidly as possible and under conditions that will prevent contamination, and deterioration, and minimise the growth of microorganisms in the food. Effective measures should be taken to prevent contamination of by direct or indirect contact with material at an earlier stage of the process.
Shape, uniformity of shape, freedom from surface irregularities, and size are important processing attributes, especially in high speed mechanised processes.
Raw material colour is a prime attribute; however it is not always a suitable index of suitability for canning. For e.g. some varieties of apples and pears develop a pink tinge on canning, rhubarb and some cherry varieties become bleached due to migration of colour into canning syrups, and chlorophyll is converted into brown-green phaeophytin during the heat processing of green vegetables.
The texture is very important. The raw material should withstand the mechanical stress incurred during the preparatory and processing operations as well as yield a final product of the desired texture.
The degree of maturity at harvest is the prime factor that influences the quality of the canned product. Penatrometer tests and measurement of the dry matter-acid ratio are acceptable means for determining optimal maturity. Maturity is important in controlling both the quality of the final product and effectiveness of processing. Over maturation results in a high proportion of reject material, excessive product damage, and spoilage during storage.
Mechanisation can cause excessive product damage. Damage increases the risk of mold and rot infections, infestation, and acceleration of enzymatic and chemical spoilage.
All lots should be inspected for evidence of spoilage or insect infestation at the time of delivery. Such problems should be dealt with before the product is brought into the plant to avoid contamination of the raw product.
The cleaning equipment should be sufficiently flexible to allow for the wide variability in the extent and types of contamination encountered in raw materials. Mechanical harvesting has increased the extraneous matter in raw materials.
Water, sugar syrups, and juices are used as a packing media for fruits. The determination of the concentration of sugars in the syrup should take into consideration the quantity and nature of sugars that will be contributed by the fruit and the proportion of fruit to syrup in the container. (Orial, 1986).
Both syrup and fruit are generally consumed; it must have pleasing organoleptic properties. The viscosity is an important factor in the thermal processing as well as organoleptically. The syrup can also be the carrier and supplier of substances to improve the or alter the colour, flavour and texture of the product. Glucose syrups which are products of starch hydrolysis have advantages over syrups made from sucrose only. They are measured according to their dextrose equivalent. (DE). DE is a measure of the degree of the conversion of starch to reducing sugars. There are advantages in using a combination of sucrose and glucose syrups over using sucrose alone. The rheological properties can be maintained without excessive sweetness, especially in fruits that have low acid levels. The physico- chemical and organoleptic qualities can be better maintained in glucose syrups then they can in sucrose as they cannot be hydrolyzed further even in the presence of very acidic fruits. They have a favourable effect on the product, prevent the flow of aromatic compounds from the fruit to the syrup and moderate the acid taste better than does a sucrose at a given sweetness level.
A strong sucrose concentration in the syrup creates a higher gradient between the syrup and the fruit, and favours diffusion of fluids from the fruit to the syrup. During storage, the dry extractable matter diffuses from the syrup into the tissues, which results in an increase drained weight up to the establishment of the final equilibrium. Therefore the yield (drained weight) is dependent upon the packing medium composition, the particle size, and the shape of the fruit.
Blanching is carried out in hot water or steam followed by rapid cooling to given to vegetables and some fruit. Blanching removes gases from within the tissue and softens the product. Blanching makes the product easier to fill into the can and obtain the correct weight. The removal of the gas also reduces the oxidation of the product, maintains vacuum in the can, and prevents corrosion. Blanching gives the product another washing treatment and inactivates enzymes which may cause deterioration of the food. Enzyme inactivation is not as important to canned foods as it is for frozen foods, as canned foods receive a far greater heat treatment during thermal processing of the can. Typical blanch times in near boiling water are 60 to 90 secs for small objects, such as green peas and diced carrot, and up to 3 min for larger peas.
Water blanching is of simple design, robust and least expensive to buy. The water flows counter-current to the product flow and is continuously recycled. The water heated by the hot blanched product in the cooling section is cooled in a heat exchanger which in turn is used to heat the water in the preheat section, providing economy in the use of water and energy.
Steam Blanching is quite common since almost all the canneries have an adequate supply of low-pressure steam. The simplest design has a metal mesh conveyor that moves through a tunnel with steam jets located under the conveyor. To minimise the e loss of steam the two ends are closed by curtains. This method is inexpensive and easy to manufacture but they are prone to temperature variations due to the effect of air currents.
Blanching under higher steam pressures increase the temperature, improves steam convection, increases the blanching rate, decreases steam loss, and produces higher reduction in the microbial contamination. Airlocks limit the loss of steam and further heat loss by radiation is minimised by appropriate insulation.
The primary role of the filling operation is to place a specified quantity (e.g. weight, number, or volume) of the product in the container. The quantity that can be added is primarily dictated by the size of the container. Precision and accuracy are dependent upon the type, state, shape, and size of the product. For solid products, the particle size has a direct influence on the fill precision (i.e. reproducibility).For many products and container types; an appropriate head space is a critical factor in the attainment of the required vacuum in the sealed container. Excessive head space can result in an excess of air in the final product, which can result in an excess of air in the final product, which can accelerate product oxidation and eventually cause internal container corrosion. Insufficient head space can lead to permanent deformation of the container ends possible leakage due to the expansion of the product and contained gases, which would render the product unsaleable. During thermal processing, the product is in continuous contact with the hot cover liquid osmotic exchanges take place. Therefore, the solid components of some products during thermal treatment and to a lesser degree during storage are going to either take on or lose weight. Fill weights must compensate for any gain or loss.
Oxygen remaining in the head space of cans accelerate of the tin plate in the head space area. To prevent this occurring, the volume of the gas between the product and the lid of the can (known as head space) must contain a partial vacuum.
The conventional system of exhausting the can is to clinch the lid on the can. Clinching is a partial, first operation seaming roll which holds the lid loosely on the can. Exhausting carried out by passing the filled cans with clinched lids through a steam filled compartment for several mins to heat the can contents and displaces the air in the can with steam. This is immediately followed by completion of the seaming operation.
Double seam integrity is of paramount importance and the minimum levels of acceptability are essentially the same for both round and irregular shaped cans.
Two identifiable seals are provided within the double seams. The primary seal is produced by embedding the body flange of the can (referred to as body hook) into the sealing compound or gasket within the end curl.
The secondary seal is created by overlapping of the body hook and end hook within the double seam.
The principal aspects of seam formation which provide a leak-free double seam are referred to as the critical parameters of acceptability. These are.
Typical critical parameter dimensions for tinplate ends and bodies (1.0mm) minimum for actual overlap, 70% minimum for body hook butting, and 75% minimum tightness rating. However, with the aluminium cans the tightness rating should be 90% minimum. In the canning industry, visual external assessment is an ongoing process with cans from each seaming station every 15 minutes. A full tear down of the double seam will be assessed for acceptable seams.
It is important to distinguish between acid and low acid food .In microbial terms, foods may be readily classified into high acid foods, such as fruits which have pH values of less than 4.5, and low-acid foods which have pH values 4.5 or greater. Low-acid foods will support the growth of heat resistant, spore-forming, pathogenic organisms and therefore require a relatively severe thermal process to ensure microbial destruction. Process temperatures will be in the region of 115 -130   C, where as acid products may be simply pasteurised at temperatures of 100  C or even lower. The most heat resistant of the pathogenic organisms is Clostridium botulinum, and by convention thermal processes are defined in terms relative to the destruction of this organism.
Our product cans were loaded by putting in steel crate. The lid was closed and the steam was turned on. Steam is an excellent heat medium because of its ability to condense on container surfaces releasing large amounts of latent heat. The main enemy of efficient heating in a closed vessel (eg.retort) using saturated steam is the presence of entrapped air especially that trapped in the small spaces between containers in the load. Even a small quantity of air has a significant effect upon temperature. For e.g. any given location 10% of air by volume will reduce the temperature by about 3  C, which will have a dramatic effect on product sterilisation. This means that in order to bring about efficient and uniform heating, air must be purged, or vented from the retort at the start of the process. It was achieved at the start of the operating cycle by introducing high velocity steam into the retort. This steam was allowed to pass through the vessels at the bottom and exit through a vent at the top since the retort was a vertical orientation type.
In practice, the efficiency of the venting process can be monitored by measurement of the temperatures in various locations throughout the retort, and the time required to remove all the air is determined experimentally. At the end of the venting time the vent valve was closed and the retort pressurised until the desired temperature was reached.
During the hold phase there must be a means for the water generated as steam condenses to escape from the retort, because immersion of the lowest containers in the vessel could result in under sterilisation. This is normally achieved either by a condensate bleed that is permanently open or having the drain cracked slightly open. In either case the absence of water in the base of the retort can be detected by a free flow of steam. On reaching the intended holding temperature the requirements are for a narrow spread of temperatures throughout the vessel and stable control at the intended temperature. For a properly vented steam retort a temperature range of less than 0.5  C is achievable, and this is a good target for all retort systems, though difficult to achieve in some types.
Once the desired hold period, (in our case 60 mins) the retort was cooled. The start of the cooling phase was most critical for ensuring the continued integrity of the processed containers.
Water used to cool containers after sterilisation or pasteurisation should be consistently is of low microbial content. For e.g. with an aerobic mesophile count of less than 100c.f.u./ml.Records should be kept of cooling water treatment and its microbiological quality. Although containers may normally be considered hermetically sealed, a small number of containers may allow intake of water during the cooling period mainly due to mechanical stress and pressure differential. To ensure disinfection, chlorine or an alternative disinfectant must be thoroughly mixed with water to a level that minimise the risk of contamination of the contents during cooling. Excessive chlorine level can accelerate corrosion of certain metal containers, so the detectable amounts of residual free chlorine should be within the range of 0.5 to 2 parts per million.
The effectiveness of the thermal process to achieve commercial sterility depends upon many factors, including the initial microbial population within the food, the time and temperature of the sterilising process, and a number of product related factors which effectively determine the heating processes which occurs within the can.
In microbial terms, food may be readily classified into high acid foods, such as fruits, which have pH values of less than 4.5, and low-acid foods which have pH values of 4.5 or greater. Low-acid foods will support the growth of heat resistant, spore-forming, pathogenic organisms and therefore require a relatively severe thermal process to ensure microbial destruction. Process temperatures will be in the region of 115-130  C, whereas acid products may be simply pasteurised at temperatures of 100  C or even lower.
The most heat resistant pathogen is Clostridium botulinum, and by convection thermal processes are defined in terms relative to the destruction of this organism. When subjected to heat micro-organisms die in algorithmic manner. The time taken at constant temperature to reduce microbial population to 10% of its former value is itself constant and is known as the decimal reduction time or D value. The D value varies with temperature. As temperature increases micro-organisms die more quickly and the D value decreases. A further parameter, the z value, is used to describe the rate of change of D value with temperature. A rise in temperature of z  will, by definition, causes a tenfold reduction in the D value. The z value for Clostridium botulinum is generally recognised to be 10  C and the D value at 121.1  C (250  F), D 121.1, is 0.21min. 1. Retort temperature and profile: The higher the temperature the faster the heating rate. Depends on sterilizer type: in static retorts and hydrostatic cookers, the temperature rises slowly and there is a lag in heating the cans; in rotary cookers the heating starts instantaneously. 2. Process time : The longer the process time the greater the heat penetration and the nearer to processing temperature the contents become. 3. Heat transfer medium: The external heat transfer coefficient, h governs the temperature at the surface of the container. Steam has a very high h, but h for water or steam-air mixtures depends on the velocity and geometry factors. 4. Container agitation : Agitation and rotation improve the internal heat transfer, depending on the amount of headspace, and degree of agitation and rotation. 5.Consistency: The composition, consistency and rheological behaviour control the rate of heat penetration. For products of a thin nature or in thin covering liquid, convection heating occurs, whilst for thicker products heat transfer is mainly by conduction. Some products (broken-heating) show both types of heating. 6. Initial temperature : The higher the initial temperature of the contents the shorter the processing. The process is very sensitive tot the initial temperature, especially for conduction-heating products, which often do not reach process temperature by the end of the process. 7. Initial spore load: The severity of the process depends on the initial spore load; good factory hygiene keeps this low. 8.Thermophysical properties : The thermal diffusivity is the controlling factor. This approximates to that of water for most products, but is lower for those which are oil-based and those of low water activity. 9. Acidity pH: The severity of the process depends on the pH of the product. Products with pH 4.5 require to the severest processes, whilst products with pH 4.5 can be pasteurised; this includes acidified products. 10. Additives : Certain additives. E.g. nisin, nitrite, salt, and sugar, reduce the process time. 11. Container materials: These include; tin plate, aluminium, glass, and plastic and laminated materials. The thermal conductivity and thickness of the material determine the rate of heat penetration. The lower the conductivity and the thicker the material, the slower the heating 12. Container shape : The external surface area and thickness of the container determine the heat penetration rate. The most rapidly heating packages have the highest surface area and thinnest profile.
Thin liquid products which heat extremely rapidly due to internal convection. E.g. fruit juices, beverages, milk, and thin soups. The thicker the consistency becomes, the slower the hating rate.
Liquid products containing solid food. The liquid portion heats rapidly by convection and transfers the heat into particulate by conduction. For products such as peas in brine and strawberries in syrup, the process is determined to a large extent by the solid-liquid ratio and packing style. For larger products such as whole potatoes or celery hearts in brine, heat penetration into the product centre of the product is necessary to ensure an adequate process and sufficient cooking.
Solid products in thick covering liquids, such as beans in tomato sauce and thick soups. Depending on the formulation, heating is first by convection and then, after thickening by starch gelation, by a conductive mechanism. These products show a heat penetration curve with tow different rates of heating, known as broken-heating curve.
Thick products which heat by conduction, and whose thermal diffusivities are about the same as water, there being insufficient or no covering liquid. This covers a wide range of products thick sauces and gravies and solid pack products.
Products which start by heating with a conductive mechanism and then, because of thinning due to structures and rheological changes, heat by convection, e.g. some thickened puddings and some tomato juices. Again this produces a broken - heating type of heat penetration curve.
Thick products which heat by conduction but have thermal diffusivities less than water, i.e. they have a high fat or sugar content. e.g. fish oil.
Vacuum-packed products contain very little water. Sufficient to produce enough steam inside the can to heat the product, e.g. corn on the cob, whole-grain corn and some vegetables.
Micro-organisms that contaminate the raw products used in canning directly affect the safety and preservation of the final product. The prime microbiological concerns of canners are:
