On the weekend of the 27 th to 29 th of October 2006 Meteorology MSc students from the University of Reading took part in a field course in an area of Dorset close to Swanage. The aim of the course was to participate in taking meteorological measurements and observations, and experience the changes that can occur in the weather over the course of a few days. This experience was gained first-hand by spending a large part of the time outdoors. Thankfully the most hostile weather conditions encountered on the weekend were nothing more than a gusty wind!.
The aim of this report is to provide an overview of the data recorded on the field trip. I will compare some of the different types of measurements with each other, and try to relate the measurements to the overall weather situation during the weekend. I will also describe how the weather changed over the weekend, and explain how these changes were represented in the meteorological data recorded.
A large amount of meteorological data was gathered on the field trip, from several different sources:
An automated met mast was in place at Durlston Head from Tuesday 24 th to Tuesday 31 st. The mast recorded measurements every five minutes of air temperature, relative humidity, wind speed and direction, solar and net radiation, ground heat flux, and potential gradient.
A total of six radiosonde balloons were launched from Durlston Head over the course of the weekend. These sent back measurements of air temperature, pressure, and relative humidity during their ascent, allowing a vertical profile of the atmospheric conditions to be made.
Another automated weather station was at Leeson House from Friday 27 th to Sunday 29 th, making measurements every ten minutes of air temperature, relative humidity, and pressure.
In addition to this, measurements were taken by the students at intervals throughout each day, using a variety of handheld meteorological instruments. The instruments included whirling psychrometers to measure dry bulb and wet bulb temperatures, digital barometers for pressure, cup anemometers for wind speed, and infra-red thermometers for cloud temperature. Observations were also made of cloud cover and type, and wind direction. These observations were made at Leeson House and Durlston Head, as well as during walks along the coastal path between the two sites.
Appendix 1 shows the Met Office synoptic charts for 00Z on Friday, 06Z on Saturday, and 00Z on Sunday. Appendix 2 shows infra-red satellite images for 10:50 on Friday, 10:26 and 21:06 on Saturday, and 02:43 and 12:47 on Sunday. Appendix 3 shows solar and net radiation fluxes recorded by the met mast at Durlston Head.
The chart for Friday 00Z shows a low pressure region centred over southern Norway. A cold front trailing from this system has just passed over the south coast of England and out into the Channel. This was a very weak front, bringing very little cloud with it, as seen from the solar and net radiation measurements (figure 18). The front passed into northern France and soon faded away, as evident from figure 13. Friday was a mostly fine day with some scattered cloud, but this built up through the evening as a new frontal system moved in. This can be seen in the chart for 06Z on Saturday (figure 11), over Cornwall.
Throughout Saturday the fronts brought a lot of cloud, but no precipitation. The advancing cloud can be seen in figure 14, as fairly continuous high or mid level cover, with some low level cloud beneath. In figure 15 the cloud is mostly at mid or lower levels.
The chart for 00Z Sunday (figure 12) shows two cold fronts over southern England and a ridge of high pressure developing over Ireland. The fronts brought a small amount of rain during the night. Figure 16 shows this band of cloud covering southern Britain, with clear skies to the north. The cloud began to clear during Sunday morning and early afternoon as the high pressure region moved across Britain. This can be seen from Figure 17.
Figure 3 shows a table of observed wind speed and direction, and cloud cover observations, taken on Saturday and Sunday. The observations agree well with the synoptic charts and satellite images for the same period.
The winds on Saturday were quite strong, as expected from the isobars on the chart, and generally came from a south westerly direction. The direction is not quite parallel to the isobars, but this is due to the fact that the measurements were taken by a person standing at ground level, and the frictional drag of the ground exerted on the air causes a slight change in direction towards the centre of low pressure. The variation in wind speed is partly due to the sheltering effects of the local topography, as measurements were made at a variety of locations during the walk. Every effort was made to find suitably exposed places for taking measurements, but this was not always possible. The cloud cover was an unbroken low level layer, which prevented any of the higher clouds shown on the satellite images from being observed.
On Sunday the wind speed was much less, due to the high pressure moving in, and the spreading out of the isobars. The low cloud began to break up through the day, allowing the higher, patchy cloud to be observed. This can also be seen on the corresponding satellite images.
NB - Wind speeds were not recorded for locations that were too sheltered for a reasonable measurement to be made. Cloud temperature is only an approximate measurement, and it was not always possible to measure temperature for all visible cloud types.
Figure 4 shows a series of air temperature measurements made on Saturday 28 th. The data recorded by the automatic stations at Durlston Head and Leeson House are plotted, as well as data recorded by two of the student groups, either at the same sites or during a walk from one to the other.
It can be seen that the readings from Durlston Head and Leeson House agree very closely with each other. The pattern of increasing and decreasing temperature is very similar. The temperature is highest during late morning and early afternoon, with a slight dip around midday. This corresponds with the incoming solar radiation measured (see figure 18), which also peaked and dipped at these times. The higher incoming solar radiation would have increased the air temperature near the surface, although the observed increase in temperature could also be partly due to the thermometer screens not being completely efficient in shielding the thermometers. There is a trend of the temperature at Durlston Head being slightly warmer than Leeson House in the morning and evening, and slightly cooler in the middle of the day. An explanation for this is Durlston Head 's proximity to the sea. The temperature of the sea experiences almost no diurnal variation, and this acts to regulate coastal temperatures, reducing the amount of cooling during the night and warming during the day.
The temperature readings taken during walk A and walk B show greater random fluctuation. This is due to the greater uncertainty involved in taking the measurements. Causes of error which may have affected these measurements include parallax error when reading the instrument, and not allowing sufficient time for the instrument to reach thermal equilibrium. The readings were taken at various different places on the walks between Durlston Head and Leeson House, but having seen how closely the measurements from these two sites agree (to within 0.5 oC) I do not think that location is a factor that influenced the temperature very greatly in this case. The measured temperatures are generally higher than those taken by either automatic station. This may be due to a systematic error, such as calibration of the thermometers, or may be due to the thermometers not being in a screen, causing them to be warmed slightly by solar radiation.
A total of six radiosonde balloons were launched over the weekend. To compare the changes that occurred in the weather between Saturday and Sunday I will look at the data received from two radiosonde launches on each of these days. Figures 5 and 6 show the data from the 10:45 and 15:02 launches on Saturday. Air temperature and calculated dew point temperature are both plotted against pressure.
These launches show fairly similar profiles. Both have temperature and dew point quite close together at low altitude, and show a slight temperature inversion at around 950 hPa. During both these launches there was an unbroken layer of stratus or stratocumulus at low level, below this inversion. The earlier launch shows a region of moist air from about 580 hPa upwards. This may correspond to the mid level altostratus cloud observed earlier in the morning between breaks in the stratus.
Figures 7 and 8 show the same parameters plotted from the 9:30 and 11:45 launches on Sunday. Again these two figures show an overall similar pattern to each other. Both have quite moist air at low levels with a temperature inversion at about 980 hPa for the 9:30 launch and about 960 hPa for the 11:45 launch. However, the low level air is becoming less moist by 11:45, this agrees with humidity measurements taken by the met mast, which show the relative humidity falling from 95% to 85% between the two launches. As with Saturday there was a layer of low cloud beneath the temperature inversion, but by 11:45 this layer was breaking up. Above the inversion in each case is a region of drier air that was not evident in the Saturday launches. This may be due to subsidence caused by the incoming high pressure ridge.
Observations and measurements made of the weekend 's weather agree well with expected conditions from the synoptic charts and satellite images. Changes were seen it the weather over the weekend, and these changes were reflected in the measurements. These changes were not very severe, for example the frontal systems passing over were quite weak, but the accuracy of the data recorded was easily good enough to allow the meteorological features to be identified. The measurements taken did show the limited accuracy that can be achieved with handheld instruments, when compared with the met mast instruments. The field trip was a useful introduction to making meteorological measurements, and also allowed plenty of opportunity to take embarrassing photos (see figure 9).
