Greenhouse gases are in majority colourless, odourless and transparent gases that have the distinct property of being transparent to incoming, short-wave, solar radiation and yet effectively absorb the outgoing, long-wave, solar radiation. They may occur in the atmosphere naturally, or they may be a product of human activities. Perhaps the most widely spoken of greenhouse gas today is carbon dioxide (CO 2) however, the most important role is held by water vapour, a gas whose abundant concentration in the atmosphere is heavily dependent on the climate itself and it is not determined by human activities. Other, less abundant, greenhouse gases are methane (CH 4), nitrous oxide (NO 2) and chlorofluorocarbons, aerosol propellants more commonly known as CFCs. Paradoxically, these insulating gases only make up 1% of the Earth 's atmospheric content.
In 1859 J. Tyndall realised that the accumulation of these gases in the upper atmosphere, despite their low concentrations, acts as a heat trap. It results from the overall inhibition of long-wave radiation back into space that makes up the greenhouse effect. It is a completely natural process, taking place for thousands of years now and without it the average surface temperature of the Earth would be 33C colder. There is, therefore, a direct link between the Earth 's climate and the greenhouse effect.
Tyndall, John (1861). "On the Absorption and Radiation of Heat by Gases and Vapors." Philosophical Magazineser. 4, 22: 169-94, 273-85.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) (2001). Climate Change 2001: The Scientific Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Third Assessment Report of the IPCC, Edited by J.T. Houghtonal. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Greenhouse gas concentrations have maintained fairly constant throughout time but during the past century, the increasing population had higher industrial and agricultural demands, which ultimately disturbed this balance by amplifying the gases' concentrations. Energy accounts for 80% of all greenhouse gas emission in the EU; it is at the root of climate change and most air pollution. Should the current energy demand of the world continue at the same rate, it will double the concentration of CO 2 in the atmosphere. This constant burning of fossil fuels is the driving force behind the rapid yearly build-up of CO 2, estimated to be about 1.5ppm (0.4%) over the past two decades. Each ton of carbon emitted into the air, results in 3.7tons of carbon dioxide.
British Petroleum, BP Statistical Review of World Energy.
European Environment Agency.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) (2001). Climate Change 2001: The Scientific Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Third Assessment Report of the IPCC, Edited by J.T. Houghtonal. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Worldwatch Institute carbon emissions estimate based on Malrand et al., Estimates of CO2 emissions, July 6, 1989.
The image above, taken from the IPCC report, 2007, clearly shows the rapid increase of CO 2 in the atmosphere. The estimates for the previous years are made through ice core measurements. On the next page, temperature deviations from the average global values are plotted against time. Comparisons of charts like these are what gave cause for investigation into the correlation between greenhouse gases and the changing global temperatures.
The accelerated climate change that the world faces during the next few decades is a direct result of past growth concentrations of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. From 1950 to 1973 emissions grew at an extraordinarily steady of 4.5% annually with few annual fluctuations. Between 1973 and 1983, carbon emission were not steady but on average increased at a rate of 1% annually. From then on however, a more rapid growth resumed at a yearly rate of 2.8% with the largest increase in 1988, 3.7%.
The Third World is currently burning fossil fuels at much lower rates than the developed world. However, the combustion of wood, straw and other biomass fuels, which also emits greenhouse gases, is not counted in international statistics. An additional burden from these countries is deforestation and desertification. Brazil for instance, is contributing an estimated 336million tons of carbon each year due to deforestation: six times as much as it contributes through fossil fuels.
Flavin C., Electircity for a Developing World , WorldWatch Paper 70, Washington D.C. June 1986.
Carbon dioxide has the largest contribution to global warming. However, methane has over 20 times the effect of CO 2 and nitrous oxide has nearly 300 times the effect. Their concentrations are mostly affected by the agriculture. Today, the estimated concentration of methane in the atmosphere is 1774ppb, a dramatic increase from its pre-industrial value of 715ppb. Nitrous oxide has been at a mostly constant concentration levels since the 1980s of 319ppb, but like methane, it has also dramatically increase since pre-industrial values of about 270ppb.
IPCC report - Policymakers 2007.
Models suggest that the major grain growing regions of North America and central China will become substantially hotter and drier. Less rain is likely to fall in these areas, winter snow packs will be smaller and remaining moisture will evaporate quickly as a result of more intense summer heat. A study at Utah State University suggests that the cropping area in the U.S. Great Plains could decline by as much as a third. Although climate will warm in currently cold areas, such as Siberia and Canada, the agricultural damage done in the mid-latitudes cannot be offset by this due to the bad quality of the soil in these regions.
Manabe S., & Wetherald R.T., "Reduction in Summer Soil Wetness Induced by an Increase in Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide" Science 2 May 1986.
During 1965 and 1987, the extent of warming was lower in the northern hemisphere than in the southern. Climate research models explain this phenomenon with the cooling effect of aerosols, present in the northern hemisphere. In the subsequent period of 1987 until 1996, the northern hemisphere warmed up more rapidly, presumably as a result of an increase in greenhouse gas emissions. A noticeable increase in temperatures in the northern hemisphere is during winter nights.
The regional impact of climate change has, until recently, been modest. Atmospheric models imply that high and mid-latitudes are the areas that will be most heavily affected, experiencing a warming greater than the global average. Tropical regions on the other hand will be experiencing the least effect. The warming in the polar regions, together with the potentially doubling CO 2 concentrations, shall be two or three times the average global warming and will amount to about 6-9C.
Manabe S., Geophysical Fluid dynamics Laboratory, NOAA, Princeton, N.J. (1987).
Vinnikov, K.Ya., Groisman, P.Ya., Lugina, K.M. & Golubev, A.A., 1987: Variations in Northern Hemisphere mean surface air temperature over 1881-1985. Meteorology and Hydrology, 1, 45-53.
By 1940 the majority of scientists still thought the rising temperature was just an observed cyclical event. G.S. Calendar had suggested that CO2 gas concentrations changed the height of the atmosphere. Although he was no able at the time to prove himself right, he did set the stage for further enquiries. In 1956 the physicist Gilbert N. Plass gave out a warning that global warming through increasing CO 2 levels could cause serious damage for future generations. Nevertheless, up to a few decades ago there was considerable uncertainty surrounding a statistical estimate of anthropogenic global warming, IPCC scientists argue today that Global climate change is very likely to have a human cause. Today 's observations have closely matched 2001 's model projections that were made. For the end of this century, the projections predict a rise in temperature in the range of 1.1C to 6.4C.
Callendar G.S, (1938) "The artificial Production of Carbon Dioxide and its Influences on Climate" Quarterly Journal, Royal Meteorological Society 64: 223-40.
Plass, G.N. (1956) "Infrared Radioation in the Atmosphere" American Journal of Physics 24: 303-21.
Black R., BBC News Science and Nature, "Humans Blamed for climate change" 2 Feb 2007.
Throughout the second half of the nineteenth century, there has been a considerable decline in the overall glacier volume in almost all mountains. The recession rate has been most rapid between 1920 and 1960. Oerlemans concluded that temperature changes were the only common factor between the complex relationships of glaciers and climate.
Grove, J.M., The Little Ice Age. Methuen, London 1988.
Oerlemans, J., Simulation of historical glacier variations with a simple climate-glacier model. J. Glaciol. 34: 333-341.
A sea level rise of 28-45cm is anticipated by the IPCC. As the water in the oceans warms, it will expand. Furthermore, the melting glaciers will add to the oceans' volume. This has a rebound consequence on agriculture, mainly in Third World countries which are heavily dependant on harvests that are now at risk from the menace of rising sea levels.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) (2001). Climate Change 2001: The Scientific Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Third Assessment Report of the IPCC, Edited by J.T. Houghtonal. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Many arid and semi-arid regions are likely to confront water shortages as global temperatures increase. Winter snowfalls will decline and spring runoff will come earlier, thus reducing the amount of runoff that can be trapped in aquifers and reservoirs.
Waggoner P. E., & Revelle R., Summary of the American Association for the Advancement of Science: Panel on Climate Change and the Planning and Management of U.S. Water Resources, 27 Sep 1988.
People would have perhaps been able to deal with the changes in the atmosphere; however, it is the rate at which these changes have been taking place that has been alarming. World agriculture is particularly vulnerable to the effects of climate change. This will also have the negative effect of rising food prices, thus jeopardising millions of lives.
Perhaps the most disturbing effect of global warming is that the damage already done is irreversible. No matter what happens to future greenhouse gas concentrations, we will always be committed to an additional warming as the climate system tends toward equilibrium.
Jones, P.D., Raper, S.C.B., Bradley, R.S., Diaz, H.F., Kelly, P.M., & Wigley, T.M.L., "Northern Hemisphere surface air temperature variations, 1851-1984" J. Clim. Appl. Met. , 25: 1213-30 (1988b).
The graphs above, taken from the IPCC 2007, Fourth Report, show observed changes in (a) global average surface temperatures, (b) global average sea level rise from tide gauge (blue) and satellite (red) data and (c) Northern Hemisphere snow cover for March-April.
