This witty comment of Tim Ingold brilliantly introduces to the main problem, which I will discuss in this piece of work. Archaeology is undoubtedly an important discipline which gives us a 'visual' insight into the history of ancient societies. However, its very nature, being based merely on perishable material remains, causes a serious interpretative dilemma and a relatively narrow perspective, focusing mainly on material culture. Here anthropology comes to aid, filling the gap between the data and their significance for the structures of ancient societies. The relation between these two disciplines is perceived differently in Britain and in America, which needs to be taken into account, since this can affect the perception of some scholars, depending on their academic background.
In America archaeology is but a counterpart of anthropology, broadly understood as the study of human activity, in which material culture (the focus of archaeology) is inevitably incorporated as a product of human activity. In Britain on the other hand, these two disciplines evolved separately, the main distinction between them being in terms of data they use for their analysis.
Bradley and Edmonds (1993) picture this difference by making an analogy between American and European mode of quest respectively, and the famous novel by Alexander Dumas, "The Count of Monte Cristo". The two main characters, Dantes and Faria, have two different ways to escape from prison. Dantes worked out the elaborated system of tunnels so that he could effectively dig one of his own, whereas Faria was simply digging blindly in a desperate attempt to find a way out. Thus, pure evaluation of material culture will lead us only to a blind, desperate act to find out the truth. But if we work out the whole system hiding behind the objects, we will be able to find our way out from a dark cell of ignorance.
As the two tunnels of our characters eventually connect, also anthropologists recently combined forces with archaeologists by introducing new anthropological approaches to previously purely archaeological investigations. This is especially evident in case of the study of exchange, because the scope of evidence available for archaeological study is limited largely to non-local imports and cargos found in shipwrecks. Therefore, in either archaeological or anthropological research we should use both of these disciplines in order to obtain an ultimate picture of an analyzed issue. As a result of their cooperation, anthropologists have been called theoreticians of archaeology, and in this work I will attempt to analyze how exactly that happened, by analyzing the new anthropological approaches in archaeology. Nothing gives a better picture than the study of exchange systems, therefore I will use it as an example to illustrate my thesis.
Exchange of material goods, whether in a form of gift exchange, redistribution or trade, has been extensively studied for the recent years. New scientific methods allow archaeologists to realize that the materials an object is made of can reveal much more about its origins that the form or shape. Therefore, the systems of exchange and the movements of goods have been examined. The basic task of such analysis is to determine the process of production and distribution of goods. The more complex reconstruction would extend to the organization of exchange systems. This inevitably made the scholars notice that the prestige goods also had symbolic value within a society (Neolithic axes were thought to be exchanged between elite groups as a symbol of prestige), which pushed the study of exchange in a different direction. As a dataset, an archaeologist uses the material remains, however the flow of information and ideas that accompanied them was equally, if not more important. So far the similarities in material culture were regarded as evidence for contacts and diffusion between two societies. This approach emphasized the origins of goods. Instead, recently the study of the contacts themselves became more influential. A theory has been suggested, that the social structure mirrors the model of repeating patterns in exchange relations between societies (Renfrew and Bahn 2002). This is undoubtedly the influence of anthropology on the typically archaeological study of exchange. We are not interested any more in merely the distribution of goods, but we want to know that was the motivation of people who exchanged this object? What value did it have for them and what did they get in exchange? There is an indefinite range of questions one could ask regarding the social aspect of the study of exchange. It is crucial, however to remember that without anthropological approach these questions would have not even existed.
In order to understand the origins of these new trends let us go back to the 1960s. and 70., when together with the gradual popularization of New or processual Archaeology, the social context of material culture became the subject of extensive research. As an excellent example we can use the study of exchange of stone axes in Neolithic Britain, which was affected by the search for social meaning. Extensive petrological analysis of artefacts and raw materials was no longer enough, hence the attempt to identify the processes behind different distribution patterns (Bradley and Edmonds 1993). As a result of the introduction of the cultural evolutionary theory within processual archaeology, three basic modes of exchange have been defined, which are reciprocity, redistribution and market. The first one is an exchange of goods between equal representatives of society or equal societies in pre-capitalist economies, the second involves some sort of bureaucratic central organization that redistributes goods that it acquired mostly through tribute and finally the last one represents the exchange of goods for other products of the same value. According to substantivist school of economic anthropology, embedding economy in social relations, societies are though to be concerned mainly with self-subsistence and static striving for equilibrium with the local "environment" (Hodder 1982). There is, however, a lot of criticism to this way of thinking. Firstly, Polanyi (1957) claims, that exchange is "a moral act following social obligations". Therefore, as it has also been stated by Dalton (1969), individuals are strictly bound to certain rules existing in society. Hodder is concerned about this lack of space that is left there for the individuals to act as a generating force for the strategies of exchange. Secondly, substantivists operate within what they term "primitive" societies, however, the boundaries and distinctions between "primitive" and advanced are highly subjective and misleading.
Moreover, on the wave of neoevolutionarism, Sahlins ascribes these three types of exchange to different levels of social organization, thus reciprocity occurred segmentary societies, and redistribution in chiefdoms and sates (Hodder 1982). Also Service divides societies into bands, tribes, chiefdoms and states on the basis of the form of exchange they represent. Fried, however, uses the social status for a basis of such division (egalitarian, ranked and stratified), which is rather a political approach. The absence of redistribution mode in case of Hawaii chiefdoms stressed by Earle (1977) significantly undermines Service 's theory.
The formalist approach on the other hand, is concerned with finding analytical techniques to identify particular modes of production and distribution. Formalists assume, moreover, that such factors as scarcity, maximization and surplus have already existed in prehistory. The main limitation of this theory is that it is absolutely deductive and applies abstract quantities, which lack explanation backed by facts. Also, in its mathematical calculations it does not take into account the variability of social processes that might have led to the same outcome.
The basic limitation of both of these schools is that they do not consider the role of symbolism of objects in the relations of exchange. Exchange can be used as a source of information about social structures only when we take into account the symbolism and contextual significance of goods exchanged, whether they are luxuries or ordinary food products, which have a certain cultural value (Hodder 1982). We need to determine the relation of the object to its regional context, bearing in mind that it could have different meaning depending on the location. These differences can even manipulate the boundaries between ethnic or social groups. Also the shapes and forms of objects could determine their fate as symbols, since some forms associated with elites tend to spread with the greater availability of resource materials to copy these forms. Their value might not be the same, but the symbolic meaning of an object associated with elite is preserved, although might be changed from the original one.
Therefore the study of exchange should be put into social context of the regions in which the exchange is carried out. However, according to Hodder (1982), substantivist approach is insufficient because it treats societies as bound to certain rules and lacks consideration for the role of an individual in the process of formation of symbolism and meaning of commodities and therefore in the valid reconstruction of social systems. Also the formalist approach seems to be very limited, purely because using merely mathematical methods have limits our scope of understanding of the wider social processes leading to the formation of value of a certain object and its social significance. Hierarchical societies give different meaning and symbolism to objects that can be taken into account neither by substantivist nor by formalist methodology.
For this reason we shall look for alternative ways of analyzing social relations and consider how different socio-political formations interacted with each other, which have been dealt with by Preucel and Hodder (1996) in The Production of Value. They refer to Renfrew and his "peer polity interaction", which states, that relations between societies (competition, "symbolic entertainment" and increased trade) form social structures, as for example, occurred in Greece where the city-states evolved as a result of interaction with each other rather than with Egypt (as the cultural evolutionary model states). The prestige goods theory says that social status depends on the access to prestige goods, therefore an increased demand and trace relations between core and peripheries. World system theory of Wallerstein is based on the interaction between societies from "the First and Third worlds such that development in one area causes underdevelopment in another" (Preucel and Hodder 1996: 103). These theories indeed offer an alternative approach, but is also has many limitations. The "peer polity interaction" seems to undermine the economic motivations of people, focusing mainly on political aspects even when explaining the increase in trade. Also prestige goods theory stresses mainly the importance of luxuries as the main driving force in the development of state economies, diminishing the significance of food products that were also part or economy. Finally the world systems theory is limited to the modern world, which archaeologists tend to forget about and impose it in archaeological data from pre-capitalist societies. Because of so many limitations, it is impossible for an archaeologist to assign himself to one particular theory. It is crucial to take into account all three of them while analyzing social relations, because each is contributing from a different angle to the debate.
Another discussion emerges, about the relation between the different types of exchanged commodities and the societies that perform the exchange. Preucel and Hodder make an in-depth analysis of the nature of the commodities themselves. They present the economic view, according to which "commodities and things which circulate throughout an economic system and can be exchanged for other things, usually money" (Preucel and Hodder 1996: 106). As an example, O'Shea (1981) presents the relation between the production of commodities and the emergence of social ranking in the Aegean, where the commodities are produced in a process of social storage as food surpluses, which are then exchanged for tokens value. The social-reproduction view uses the Marxist perspective of the commodities being a product of labor within a particular mode of production, which is then passed to another social group in form of exchange (Preucel and Hodder 1996). The politics of value consider the interrelation between the movement of goods within and between spheres of circulation and the impact which this movement has on the societies involved in exchange. Commodities and their meaning instill certain symbolism in an individual or in a group, therefore it is not possible to ascribe only one meaning or one value to an object. We need to bear in mind the route it had to go through, its biography.
According to Kopytoff (1986: 68), "a commodity is a thing that has use value and that can be exchanged in a discrete transaction for a counterpart, the very fact of exchange indicating that the counterpart has, in the immediate context, an equivalent value". The author does looks at commodities from a more social than economic perspective, analyzing their meaning to different societies rather than economic, political or technological values. Thus, there are different types of goods exchanged: commodities, valuables and people. These three can change their meanings and function depending on their social context and economic process they went thought to reach their current location. Therefore, commodities can become valuables, people can decline to the position of a commodity (mainly through a slave market) etc. But each of these three groups develops a biography with time. Therefore, it is crucial for an archaeologist or anthropologist to create a biography of an object they scrutinize, in order to provide a wider perspective on the history of its value, which then helps to understand the social process involved in the journey of this object. The argument that allows us to treat objects like people and create their biographies is that in fact it is the society that creates individuals and individuality, whether of a single person or a whole group of people (a tribe, a chiefdom etc.) and society also creates objects, therefore this puts people and objects in the same position and gives them inter-exchangeable meaning, which gives us right to build a biography also for objects (Kopytoff 1986). This, however, makes me think whether it is not actually the opposite? At least in some cases the objects create society, being imported from another social group it has a different meaning in the one it currently exists, but because of its former history and symbolism it can affect its new owners. The massive amount of Coke bottles in our European society is but the one factor that slowly transforms us into an even more consumption-focused American society. It might have not created the European Western society, but it certainly has an impact on it.
It seems that Tim Ingold 's problem with archaeology being "always too late" can be easily solved by applying anthropological approaches to archaeological investigations. As it has been proved in this work, they not only provide us with a wider social context of studies material culture but actually put that aspect into being in the first place. This process was, however, initiated by the introduction of processual archaeology and its quest for more contextual interpretations. Therefore, it might be more appropriate to state, that first archaeological approaches were applied to anthropology and then used in archaeology itself. Considering this, it is necessary to take into account regional differences in approaching these two disciplines on both sides of the Atlantic. American anthropology consists of archaeology, therefore it is difficult to talk about anthropological approaches there. In Europe, on the other hand, these two disciplines tremendously affect one another, the example of which is best seen in the study of exchange systems.
In terms of the relation between the type of exchange and social structure our understanding of the matter has improver significantly after the works of such scholars like Polanyi, Dalton or Service, later also Hodder and Preucel. The latter two reevaluated the theories of the former ones, pointing to their main limitations and suggesting an alternative solution. Thus, instead of using merely substantivist and formalist approach to study of exchange, they promote considering also symbolic value of material culture and their political implications. In a way they did not achieve much more than their predecessors, as they did not offer an ultimate way of approaching the subject, but rather a series of another very specifically focused theories, which are also by no means flawless. Therefore, it is necessary to bear in mind the limitations that all these theories bring and preferably try and apply all of them at once (to a certain extent, of course) in order to obtain an accurate picture of the past exchange systems and their social implications.
The nature of the artefacts themselves seems to be well-scrutinized by Preucel, Hodder and Kopytoff. They emphasized the complexity of the nature of exchanged artifacts and the shifts in their value due to various social processes. This draws the attention of scholars to the social aspect of material culture instead of merely examining the typology and distribution. Kopytoff, moreover, stresses the individual character of goods, which can become individualized throughout the history of their use, which corresponds to the theory of Hodder, that we need to remember about the role of individuals in the process of formation of symbolism of objects, which fills in the gap in the substantivist approach represented by Polanyi.
Therefore, it is evident, that anthropology contributed a lot to the understanding of the material culture and together with archaeology can form a coherent and decent view of the past exchange systems. For the past few decades archaeologists criticized the amount of attention that the typological approach was gaining within archaeological study. With the development of anthropological approaches, we need to beware of the danger of pushing the line in the other direction, not to be faced with the problem of insufficient archaeological data in the future.
