Deposition of artefacts (often valuable metalwork), or hoarding as it is more commonly known, within the landscape is a well known and studied aspect of prehistoric behaviour and culture. Deposits are found in many varied locales and are disposed of in different manners; they consist of myriad artefact typologies as well as cover a wide range of forms and functions. They also help archaeologists to form chronologies and chart the history of metal production as well the formation of certain societies. Deposition is a world wide phenomenon and exists in many eras from the Mesolithic to the medieval periods. But it is most well known and studied within the European arena (as well as the most stunning artefacts). Archaeologists have over the years presented many theories concerning the motivations behind deposition and have also proposed a set of categories to work with.
One of the major theories concerning Bronze Age hoarding that has been presented by and argued for by archaeologists is relatively straightforward and logical, is that hoards are a direct response to warfare and periods of political and social unrest. This theory basically states that the fear of war and the associated plundering and raiding would result in people 'hiding away' valuable goods in order to protect their wealth. The goods deposited in this circumstance would have been deposited with the intention of being retrieved at a later date and would have been placed (in most situations) in a pit or posthole for safe keeping (Grinder - Hansen 23rd March 2001, ). It can therefore be argued (but never proven beyond a shadow of a doubt) that if the people responsible for this form of deposition did not return it was for reasons that were beyond their control (this can be also be arguably applied to Founders, Merchants, and Personal hoards). They may not have survived the turmoil or had to the leave the area quickly and were unable to return, but this is ultimately just conjecture (Bradley 1996).
A good example of deposition (although rather late) during times of warfare and unrest is the Hoxne treasure (pronounced 'Hoxon') which is comprised of over 15,000 gold and silver coins, gold jewellery (comprises of a body-chain, a small group of necklaces, three finger-rings and 19 bracelets), silver tableware such as pepper pots, as well as ladles and spoons (obviously items for everyday domestic use with no ritual significance attached to them). The previously mentioned items were found in the remains of a large wooden chest. It was discovered in November 1992 by Eric Lawes, who immediately reported the find and did not remove all the objects from their contexts. This responsible conduct enabled the Suffolk Archaeological Unit to carry out a controlled excavation of the deposit, which has greatly enhanced the importance of the Hoxne Treasure for research in the future as well as preserved vital contextual information (Bland R, Johns C.M, 1993; 17).
The latest of the coin issues in the hoard establishes that its deposition took place some time after 407 A.D. This was the period when Roman rule was starting to break down in Britain and was extremely unstable, and the Hoxne hoard could well be related to these events. The careful burial of this treasure suggests that it was temporary in nature, meaning that the owner intended to return and recover them (Bland R, Johns C.M, 1993; 19).
One of the only ways to provide evidence to support this theory is to take a comparative approach. To do this it is possible to take into account hoards from later better documented (not always!) periods such as the early medieval and middle to late medieval periods. The hoards would have to be as accurately dated as possible and then compared to surviving records (both documentary and archaeological) of political and social unrest from that particular period. It can then be argued (if a correlation is found between periods of warfare and unrest and an increase in hoarding/deposition in that region) that hoarding does indeed intensify during times of warfare and political and social upheaval (Grinder - Hansen 23rd March 2001, ).These results can then be extrapolated to the Bronze and Iron ages and used as a model for future arguments. Richard Bradley argues against this approach and says that it has "led to contradictory interpretations, and has obscured some of the most striking developments that took place over time" (Bradley 1996). which means that it can lead to false conclusions which would obscure scientific fact, what is true in one context is not necessarily true in another.
Some hoards are representative of the systems concerning Bronze and Iron Age metal production, manufacture and manipulation. This type of deposition is commonly known as a Founder hoard (Minster in Kent and Ashbury in Oxfordshire are two such examples) and is generally associated with the production of metallurgy. For the most part they consist of broken, used or unfit metal objects, bronze/iron/copper/tin ingots, casting waste and in many circumstances complete or newly finished objects (Champion, Gamble Shennan, Whittle 1984: 288 -289). Hoards of this variety are another example of depositions that are temporary in nature as the person or persons responsible probably did intend to return and retrieve the objects. Hoards that include metal ingots are generally indicative of raw material usage, distribution/exchange networks, supply and material composition which provide archaeologists with vital data; they also provide key insights into standardization (Bradley 1996).
Whereas hoards that are composed of valuable objects of a similar design and style that were deposited near to or soon after final stages of production and manufacture are argued to be the stock of a metalworker being held securely in reserve whilst awaiting distribution and trade (Champion, Gamble Shennan, Whittle 1984: 288 -289). This argument (if true) has important ramifications and provides vital data concerning the demand for certain objects during the Bronze and Iron Ages. It can be asserted that metalworkers were producing and manufacturing items in anticipation of demand as opposed to waiting until the items were needed, it shows that in some cases and regions a surplus was required.
The two previously discussed types of founder hoard are mainly dated by archaeologists to approximately the 13 th century B.C. It is not until approximately the 10 th century B.C that a new and distinct form of founder hoard appears (Champion, Gamble Shennan, Whittle 1984: 288 -289). This new type of deposit is composed of objects that are to all intensive purposes scrap metal. The deposits are comprised of objects that are old and worn, some showing heavy long term usage and have in many cases been rendered useless. Some of these particular deposits are made up of hundreds, even thousands of metallic items, many of which have been broken up into smaller pieces. The largest deposit ever found in England is a founder 's hoard known as the Isleham hoard, numbering 6500 pieces is the most famous example.
Hoards such as these, some archaeologists have argued; contain vital information and key data respecting the nature of metal production and manufacture in the Bronze and Iron Ages (Champion, Gamble Shennan, Whittle 1984: 288 -289). They argue that deposits of this nature prove that Bronze and Iron Age metalworkers were concerned enough about the supply of raw materials that they secured reserves of material that could be recycled if necessary. This argument is supported by supplementary evidence, the location of the deposits are often found in direct association with sites of metal production. (Champion, Gamble Shennan, Whittle 1984: 288 -289).
Merchant hoards are another form of deposition associated with the temporary placing of valuable objects in a secure location. They are usually composed of objects that have been newly completed and are similar to founder hoards because they are being stored (in part at least) in anticipation of future demand (there is also an element of security in order to prevent theft by storing the objects in a place known only to the merchant). The type of objects that may well be included in such a hoard include functional items such as tools, weapons of varying types and a certain proportion of luxury or prestige goods intended for the elite classes (Bradley 1996).
Another argument that has been presented concerning hoarding is that they are acts of consumption and can be used as political tools of control. It is believed by some groups of archaeologists that high status metallic goods were at least part of the basis for the establishment of control in the emerging stratified societies that are indicative of the Bronze and Iron Ages. The elite 'ruling' classes of the time period in question would have turned the supply of high status goods to their advantage using them as tools to confirm their status, Limiting the quantities available would have served a distinct and useful purpose as too many high status goods in circulation would have lowered their value and status and led to difficulties in restricting access. (Champion, Gamble Shennan, Whittle 1984: 294).
By taking older high status goods out of circulation and depositing them where they could not be easily retrieved it meant that more items could be acquired whilst keeping their intrinsic value and status at a premium. The method of deposition (as well as the types of goods deposited) varies from region to region, ranging from large scale burials to deposition in inaccessible locations (such as lakes, rivers and peat bogs) to simple pit burials. High status burials (for example Hochdorf, Germany and Vix in eastern France) would have had a threefold purpose, firstly to reiterate the power, status and wealth of the individual interred, secondly to fulfil any ritual and religious requirements concerning burial practice and thirdly to take certain items out of circulation (Bahn P 2004: 205 & 506). Archaeologists can arguably use this type of evidence very effectively to explore and chart the ever changing role of status in the hierarchical societies of Bronze and Iron Age Europe (Champion, Gamble Shennan, Whittle 1984: 294).
Votive deposits are deposits that are ritual in nature or have had some form of religious significance attached to them. This does of course leads to difficulties concerning the identification of ritual which is notoriously difficult to pinpoint. They are considered to be different from the vast majority of other forms of deposition; partly because of their ritual nature but also because of their permanence. The permanent (placed for the main part in non - retrievable locations) nature of votive deposits is in direct contrast with the temporary or accidental nature of other forms of deposition (such as merchant or founder hoards). A large number of Votive deposits have been found in places which provide supporting evidence concerning their permanent nature (Harding A F 2000: 326 - 329). They have been recovered from a wide variety of locations such as peat bogs (Vikso, Northern Zealand, Denmark), rivers and lakes (Ljubljanica River, Ljubljana, Slovenia) and other 'watery' places (Cunliffe B 1997: 330; Kaufmann C 2007). Other locations are also utilized such as mountain passes (Italy, Alpine Regions) and even the bases of cliffs, areas of metal production also receive some attention. A good example of this is the Bronze Age hoards from Dieskau, Saallkreis in central Germany (approx 2000 B.C) an area adjacent to the rich copper (Cu) sources of the Harz mountains (Cunliffe B 1997: 256). It is fairly obvious that retrieval of these deposits would be very difficult or even impossible.
Votive deposits can sometimes be identified purely for the fact they sometimes contain a wider range of goods that need not be 'manufactured remains' but can also include organic remains such as animal (antlers, skeletal) remains as well as human remains (sacrifices, burials) (Bradley 1996). The range of manufactured goods can be very far reaching and cover several distinct typologies. A British examples may be seen at Flag Fen near Peterborough in Northern England. Metal detectors (one of the principle methods employed to locate hoards, whether accidental or purposely) were used to great effect to reveal a remarkable series of beautifully worked metallic (bronze) goods. These objects included swords and rapiers, spearheads (see front page for photographic example), chapes, knives, awls, razors, rings, pins, a gouge and an axe, as well as other smaller objects and a small but noteworthy collection of iron objects (Byford J 20th February 2007. ).
Whilst many votive objects are complete or finished, there are on the other hand many that show signs of previous wear and tear, and some that are broken or damaged (comparable to those found in founders hoards but not entirely the same) or show some casting flaws. It can be argued that in some cases the act of deposition coincided with the end of the objects 'life' or when it had outlived its usefulness. Some archaeologists (including Francis Pryor of Time Team fame) argue that in some deposits the objects were deliberately damaged before deposition (comparable to the Roman practice of piercing pots before depositing them in wells) again reminiscent of objects coming to the end of their usefulness and then being symbolically destroyed before they enter the  'supernatural' world (Harding A F 2000: 326 - 329).
Some objects appear to have been made specifically for ritual purposes and even for the act of deposition itself, in some cases this can be characterised by poorer manufacturing techniques or material usage. For example in some deposits axe heads have been found that have been cast from lead (Pb), a weak soft metal that would have rendered the object useless for everyday practical use(Harding A F 2000: 326 - 329).
The Battersea Shield (now residing in the British Museum) is an example of a specifically made ritual item; it was dredged from the Thames near Battersea Bridge and has been dated to the Iron Age, approximately 350-50 BC. The Battersea shield was not made for serious warfare and is too short to provide sensible protection. The thin metal sheet and the complicated decoration would be easily destroyed if the shield was hit by a sword or spear. Instead, it was probably made for flamboyant display and ritual. The highly polished bronze and glinting red glass would have made for a great spectacle. It was finally thrown or placed in the River Thames, where many weapons and other items were offered as votive deposits and sacrifices throughout the Bronze Age and Iron Ages (Stead I.M, 1985: 21). It is therefore entirely plausible to argue that its purpose was distinctly ceremonial possibly intended specifically for votive deposition. This highlights the importance of ritual in Bronze and Iron Age Europe. Votive deposits represent one of the key interfaces between the peoples of these periods and their gods as well as providing key insights into their belief systems (Champion T 1999: 106 -108).
The significance of 'watery' locations is unavoidable and highly indicative of votive deposits, the earliest deposits date to the Mesolithic (Scandinavia, Slovenia). These locations were obviously of great importance to the people who made these offerings, it is however unknown exactly how they viewed these places (theories include portals to the  'supernatural' realm, mirror images of our own reality) and why they were so specifically chosen (Stead I.M, 1985: 29). Some locations received offerings over extended periods of time (Dowis, Co. Offaly, Ireland) even stretching into the hundreds and thousands of years (Bahn P 2004: 130). The Ljubljanica River in Slovenia is one such example; depositions have been recovered from the river for over 20 years numbering 10,000 - 13,000 or more. The earliest being Mesolithic in origin through the Bronze and Iron ages, the Roman occupation and even a 17 th century flintlock pistol has been recovered. This proves the argument that certain locations had a certain sacred aspect that held a special place in the belief systems of the Bronze and Iron Ages. They were visited time and time again and must have been centres of religious focus (Kaufmann C 2007). However it is not enough to merely identify ritualistic behaviour, it must be explained and understood which presents a whole new set of problems.
In some cases deposits are viewed as boundary markers, these deposits mark all kinds of boundaries in the ancient world as well as significant or special places within the landscape. For example these kinds of deposits have been found in niches in walls or buried in postholes within settlement locales. It is however difficult to determine whether or not these locations had some kind of cultural, ritual or social implication or the deposits were just personal in nature. Some deposits have been found in seemingly random locations, but when viewed as part of the wider landscape they appear to have some form of significance (Bahn P 2004: 174).
In conclusion archaeologists have devised many theories to account for the deposition of metallurgy in Europe. Each theory looks at the major (and minor) differences in form, style, typology, location, scale and condition of the artefacts in each assemblage and then assigns them to a particular category. Each category has its own approach and definition which helps to formulate theoretical viewpoints concerning the reasoning behind the deposition of metallurgy. Ultimately these theories are just conjecture and the true reasoning behind the act of deposition is elusive.
