Polymers based on the silicon-oxygen linkage are the only major commercial polymers with an inorganic backbone. These polymers are produced by hydrolysis of an organo-dichlorosilane, followed by spontaneous condensation of the product silanediol with elimination of water. The final result is a long chain polymer known as polysiloxane (silicone).
If the reaction takes place at low concentration then the cyclic compounds; cyclopolysiloxanes are formed, this is due to the kinetic favourability for the 2 ends of the chain to react with each other than another chain (at low concentrations).
In the experiment, from the starting compound, dichlorodiphenylsilane one can isolate the intermediate silanediol, as diaryl compounds are found to be more stable than their dialkyl counterparts. Condensation of diphenylsilanediol in dilute solution gives two different cyclopolysiloxanes, one of them will be isolated depending on whether an acid or base catalyst is used.
See COSSH sheet.
To begin a mixture of toluene (10ml), t-amyl alcohol (25ml) and water (100ml) was cooled in a conical flask (500ml) to ~10 oC in an ice-water bath, whilst being stirred magnetically, solution turned cloudy. To the vigorously stirred mixture, a solution of diphenyldichlorosilane (20ml) in toluene (10ml) was added dropwise over a 15-minute period. The temperature was held between 10 - 15 oC throughout by adding more ice water when necessary, a white precipitate was formed.
The reaction mixture was stirred for a further 10 minutes and following this the crystalline solid was filtered off by suction. The solid was washed with water (100ml), then washed twice with 5% sodium hydrogen carbonate solution (50ml X 2), and further washed with water (100ml X 2). The crystals were then stirred gently whilst the vacuum was in operation. After an hour the crystals where easily moved and free flowing. Once dried the yield, melting point where measured and IR spectrum was obtained.
To a "Quickfit" conical flask (100mL), diphenylsilanediol (5.0189 g) and 95% ethanol (50ml) was added, in addition a solution of sodium hydroxide (0.4521g) in water (1ml) was further added with stirring. The mixture was then transfered into a round-bottomed flask where it was heated under reflux in an oil bath, with magnetic stirring. The solution was heated under reflux for ~30 minutes and then cooled in an ice bath, fine white crystals were formed from solution. The crystals were then filtered off and air dried until free flowing. The product was then dissolved in a minimum volume of heated toluene (~70 oC) following this a small amount of ethanol was added until crystals began to form. The solution was then re-heated to take the newly formed crystals back into solution. The solution was then cooled again by ice-bath, giving fine, needle-like crystals. The crystals where then filtered off, a yield and melting point measured and an IR spectrum obtained.
The literature melting point for diphenylsilanediol is 201-202 oC; In comparison to our value of 149.1 oC - 166.8 oC; octaphenylcyclotetrasiloxane literature quoted to be 187 oC In comparison to our experimental value of 193.7 oC - 198.6 oC. Differences can be accounted for by impurities in our products.
All the peaks are in the range 7-7.5ppm indicateing that the H 's are all in aromatic environments. Hydrogen 's are found in a ratio of 2:2:1.
The peaks on the spectra show there are four C environments; phenyl groups bonded to each of the Silicon atoms, and two phenyl groups bonded to one silicon atom.
From the IR spectra the structures are fairly consistent, however there are anomalous errors between the two. In the IR spectra of diphenylsilanediol we can see the O-H stretch and the C-H stretch, in the spectra for octaphenylcyclotetrasiloxane peaks for the C-H stretches can be seen however the O-H stretch is lost. There were some unexplained peaks picked up in the IR spectrum, which shows that there were impurities.
The fragmentation pattern of octaphenylcyclotetrasiloxane shows that the weakest bond in the molecule is the Si-C bond. This can be deduced as the main peaks are due to loss of phenyl groups; the phenyl groups are bonded to Si atoms by carbon. Carbon-silicon bonds compared to carbon-carbon bonds are longer (186 pm vs. 154 pm) and weaker; bond dissociation energy 451 kJ/mol vs. 607 kJ/mol. The C - Si is strongly polarized towards carbon due to higher electronegativity.
Compounds of formula R 2CO and R 2SiO differ due to their difference in bond strength, Carbon is the only group 14 element that is able to form strong pie bonds with oxygen. The effects of this bonding can be seen when comparing their physical properties to their silicon counterparts. Carbon is bounded to oxygen by both    and p  -p   bonds, however for silicon it is more energetically favourable to form single bonds.The C=O bond has good p-orbital overlap due to carbon being of a similar atom size relative to silicon being a lot smaller, the silicon atom is too big for p-orbital overlap to be effective. The silicon-oxygen sigma bond is highly stable because it does not differ greatly in electronegativity. The carbon-oxygen is also stable, however due to a bigger difference in electronegativities the bond becomes polar which is open to attack. Silicon based compounds are most likely to be cyclic due to their favourability for forming single bonds, their structures become based on O-Si-O bridges, this is in comparison to Carbon based compounds in which pie bonds are more preferable and therefore a monomeric structure is adopted.
The reaction is base catalysed and therefore a silicon atom becomes hypervalent (an atom having more bonds/electrons in its valence shell then would be allowed by the octet rule) resulting in loss of a hydroxyl group. This causes the two ends of the molecule to react forming a cyclic structure.
To convert a cyclic siloxane to a linear polysiloxane one would use sulphuric acid under heat to protonate the oxygen atoms, therefore breaking the Si-O bonds. The heat provides the energy to break this highly stable bond and make the reaction thermodynamically/kinetically favourable.
From the data collaborated we can see that we have prepared diphenylsilanediol and octaphenylcyclotetrasiloxane, however both compounds do contain impurities. These may have been encountered at various stages of our experiments, and one must also question the purity of our starting materials.
