There are many factors that affect the geometries of transition metal complexes, including thes relative energies of the metal 's d orbitals, the number of d electrons the metal has, the oxidation state of the metal and the size of both the ligands and the metal. In this experiment, three d 8 first row transition metal complexes will be synthesised and their structures determined from their infrared spectra and magnetic properties. 1.2080g of Cobalt chloride hexahydrate was dissolved in 140mL of ethanol, in a 250mL 2-necked round bottom flask, fitted with a nitrogen inlet. 4.092g of tripheylphosphine was added to the bright blue solution. The flask was flushed with nitrogen, and heated in an oil bath to 35 C. The solution was stirred magnetically, while a nitrogen atmosphere was maintained and the temperature remained between 30 and 40C. A solution of 0.1881g of sodium borohydride in 10mL of ethanol was added to the round bottomed flask, causing the solution to gradually turn from dark turquoise through to brown/ black in colour and small bubbles of gas were evolved.
The solution was stirred for a further 15 minutes after the addition, then the fine brown crystals were filtered off on a glass sinter with suction. The crystals were washed with three 30mL portions of ethanol, then two 20mL portions of water, followed by a further two 20mL portions of ethanol. The crystals were dried in a vacuum dessicator for an hour before the yield and melting point were determined. Figure 1 shows the IR spectrum of the product, the magnetic susceptibility of the complex is shown in table 1. 45mL of ethanol was placed in a 100mL round bottom flask, 2.8178g of triphenyphosphine and 1.2076g of nickel (II) chloride hexahydrate was added to it. Two anti-bumping granules were also placed in the flask and the solution was refluxed in an oil bath for 30 minutes. The apparatus was then set to downward distillation and 30mL of ethanol was distilled off. The black crystals were filtered off on a small sintered glass filter with suction and washed with 15mL of 95% ethanol, and 15mL diethylether. Once the crystals were dry the melting point and magnetic properties were determined (table 1) and the IR spectrum of the compound was obtained (Figure 2). 1.4022 g of nickel (II) nitrate hexahydrate was dissolved in 16mL of 95% ethanol in a 100mL round bottomed flask. 0.8105g of finely ground sodium thiocyanate and two anti bumping granules were added to this. The mixture was refluxed for 20 minutes on and oil bath. The mixture was then cooled on ice, and the sides of the vessel were scratched with a glass rod to encourage crystalisation of sodium nitrate. The crystals of sodium nitrate were filtered off through a sintered glass crucible. 2.7962g of triphenylphosphine was dissolved in 25mL of propan-2-ol in a round bottomed flask, by heating with two anti-bumping granules with a reflux condenser attatched. The filtrate of nickelthiocyanate, from the previous part of this experiment was heated on a hot plate, and slowly added to the triphenylphosphine through the tom of the condenser. This caused the colourless solution to turn a vibrant red colour. The flask was then removed from the oil bath and cooled in an ice bath, forming red crystals. These crystals were then filtered off on a small sintered glass filter with suction, washed with 15mL of 95% ethanol, then 15mL of diethylether, and dried on the filter. The IR spectrum of the product was obtained (figure 3), its magnetic susceptibility was determined (table 1) and its melting point was found to be 234C.
Table 1: summarises the magnetic properties of the three complexes synthesised in this experiment. X g is mass susceptibility of the complex, given by the formula: where l is the length of the sample in sample tube, C is the calibration constant (1.275) R is the reading from the evans balance, R 0 is the reading for the empty sample tube and m is the mass of sample analysed. m is the molar magnetic susceptibility which is calculated by multiplying g by the molar mass (M r) of the complex in question. A is the molar magnetic susceptibility for the complex, which has been corrected for the diamagnetism of the components of the complex. The corrections used are: 13x10 -6 for the metal ions, 167x10 -6 for (PPh 3), 23x10 -6 for Cl- and 34 x10 -6 for (NCS).
There are two possible co-ordinations for four co-ordinate complexes: square planar and tetrahedral. The crystal field splitting diagrams for these two geometries are shown below filled with 8 d electrons as in the complexes in this experiment:
As these diagrams show, the square planar geometry is often more favourable for d 8 complexes, because all the electrons may be paired up in low energy orbitals, leaving the highest energy orbital unoccupied. However, the terahedral geometry is sterically much more favourable, because the bond angle in this case is 109, compared with 90 for the square planar geometry. Steric factors are much more important when considering first row transition metals, because the metals are much smaller, so the repulsion between the electrons in metal-ligand bonds will be increased. This means that bulky ligands will usually force the complex to adopt a tetrahedral geometry.
The energy difference between the e and t 2 set of orbitals in the tetrahedral geometry (T) also affects the geometry of the complex, sine the crystal field stabilisation energy (CFSE) of the complex depends on this (CFSE = - 0.8 T). The magnitude of T is affected by the oxidation state of the metal: a greater oxidation state pulls the ligands closer to the metal, increasing the splitting effects; and the field strength of the ligand: stronger field ligands such as (PPh 3) and (NCS) increase the splitting.
The magnetic moments of the complexes synthesised in this experiment (see in table 1) indicate that CoCl(PPh 3)3 and NiCl 2(PPh 3)2 contain 2 unpaired electrons, and Ni(NCS)2(PPh 3)3 is paramagnetic. This means that CoCl(PPh 3)3 and NiCl 2(PPh 3)2 adopt a tetrahedral geometry, while Ni(NCS)2(PPh 3)3 exists in a square planar arrangement.
From this it is clear that steric factors out weigh the benefits of the low energy square planar configuration in the case of the CoCl(PPh 3)3 and NiCl 2(PPh 3)2 complexes. Conversely the Ni(NCS)2(PPh 3)3 complex contains two relatively strong field ligands, which increase the size of T making the tetrahedral configuration even more energetically unfavourable than the square planar complex.
Geometric and linkage isomerism are possible for this complex:
The co-ordination of the (NCS) ligand can be determined with the infrared spectrum of this complex (figure 3). If the ligand co-ordinates to the metal atom via the sulphur atom, the stretching of the CS bond appears at 700cm -1 in the spectrum, and the CN bond absorbs at approximately 2100cm -1. If the ligand co-ordinates to the metal via the nitrogen atom, however, these stretching frequencies are different; approximately 800cm -1 for the CS bond, and approximately 2050cm -1 for the CN bond. In figure 3 the absorbances at 2084 and 692cm -1 are most likely to correspond to the CS and CN bond stretches in the ligand, which are closest to the values quoted for bond stretches where the ligand bonds through the sulphur atom.
As there are only two absorption bands for each of these bonds, I expect that the complex adbots a trans geometry. This is because on the asymmetric stretch for a trans complex will cause a change in the dipole moment, so only one absorption will be observed. For a cis complex, both the symmetric and asymmetric stretches of the metal-ligand bond will cause a change in the dipole moment, resulting in two absorbtion bands around this region of the spectrum. This is consistent with steric arguments, as the cis complex would place the two large (PPh 3) ligands next to each other with an angle between them of 90. This means that the Ni(NCS)2(PPh 3)3 complex exists as structure 4 shown above.
