Seed quality includes both vigour and viability of seeds. During seeds storage, seed quality deteriorates and the loss in both viability and vigour demonstrates this deterioration in seed quality. In this experiment the effect of two main factors, temperature and seeds moisture content during storage, on the loss in vigour and viability in pea (Pisum sativum L.) seeds was examined. This was carried out by storing the pea seeds at two temperatures and two moisture contents and testing seed viability and vigour after various storage periods. Viability was measured by germinating the seeds and counting the number of normal and abnormal seedlings (ISTA, 1979). Vigour was estimated as the electrical conductivity of water in which seeds had been soaked for 24 hours (ISTA, 1995).
The pea seeds at 13.5 and 15.7% moisture contents were divided into various lots and then pre-packed into laminated aluminium foil packets to maintain the seed moisture content during storage. These packets were then stored for various periods at different temperatures (Table 1). After storage treatment, packets were stored at 3   C to prevent further deterioration before germination and vigour tests. 3 replicate samples of 40 seeds for each of the 11 storage treatments were used. Each sample of 40 seeds were placed between moistened rolled non-stained and non-bleached paper towels and the rolled towels were placed in polythene bags before put in 20   C for germination. After one week germinated at 20   C, because of the time constraint, samples were remoistened and store in cold room for another week before being counted for the number of normal seedlings, abnormal seedlings and dead seeds.
One sample of 50 seeds for each of the 11 storage treatments was used. 50 seeds sample was weighted and put in a beaker with 225 ml deionised water for 24 hours at 20   C. Two beakers of deionised water without seed also kept at 20   C for 24 hours and these were used as control for the electrical conductivity measurement. Seeds were removed from the water before electrical conductivity measurement. Electrical conductivity per gram of seed was calculated using the following equation. ec is electrical conductivity.
Raw germination data are in Appendix 1. The mean percentages of normal seedlings from 3 replicated samples were used for the survival curves in Figure 1. The 15.7 % moisture content survival curve deteriorated faster than the 13.5 %, even though both samples were stored at same temperature, 50   C. Both survival curves are negative normal cumulative distribution functions and this shows pea seeds have orthodox seed storage characteristics.
The negative normal cumulative distribution survival curves can be modelled by straight lines when percentage is transformed into probit percentage (Graph 1) and this linear relationship can be described by Equation 1, where v are probit percentage viability, p is storage period,     is the standard deviation of the frequency distribution of seed deaths in time and Ki is a constant for the seed lot. Notice that both survival curves of different moisture contents intercepted the Y - axis at the same point, this is because the seeds were from the same seed lot and had the same initial viability, Ki.
However, according to Ellis & Roberts (1981), the viability v could be calculated by Equation 2. Where t is temperature in   C, m is moisture content in percentage of fresh weight and Ki, KE, CW, CH and CQ are constants.
And for a limited range of temperatures, a simpler Equation 3 can be used (Ellis, 1988).
By comparing Equation 1 with Equation 3,     can be expressed in term of t and m as in Equation 4.
From Graph 1 viable seeds survival curves (broken lines), the standard deviation of the survival period,        for 15.7 and 13.5 % moisture contents were 2.9 and 6.2 days. As Equation 4 shows, there is a linear relationship between the logarithmic value of     and the logarithmic value of moisture content, m (Table 2 and Figure 2).
The slope of the line in Figure 2 gives the value of CW, which is 5.0 for viable seeds. This in comparison with data obtained from normal seedlings survival curve (solid lines) in Graph 1,     were 2.8 and 5.4 days for 15.7 and 13.5 % moisture contents and this lead to CW = 4.3 and the two CW values are similar.
When storage temperature was reduced from 50   C to 40   C, the standard deviation of the survival period,     increased (increase in longevity). Only one storage treatment was 40   C in this experiment, and even after 8 days of storage, the germination was still 100% (Appendix 1), so viable seeds survival curves could not be used to estimate temperature constant, C2 in Equation 4. Table 3 data was obtained by using the normal seedlings survival curves (solid lines) in Graph 1.
Equation 4 models the relationship between log 10    and temperature t as linear (see Discussion section), estimation of C2 could be made by using two points calculation of the slope, which gave C2 = 0.0646.
With approximate values of CW and C2, constant KE in Equation 4 could be estimated. As normal seedlings survival curves were used to calculate the value of temperature constant, C2, 4.3 is chosen for CW (estimated from normal seedlings survival curves). By substituting     = 2.8 days, m = 15.7 % and t = 50   C into Equation 4, KE is estimated to be 8.82.
The increase in electrical conductivity in seed steeped water was due to seeds exudation and this is a good indicator of the integrity of the seed coats. If the seed coats of most seeds were intact, the electrical conductivity of the water would be low and the seeds would show high vigour. Conversely, if the seed coats of most seeds were damaged, the electrical conductivity of the water would be high and the seeds would show low vigour. Figure 3 shows electrical conductivity increase over storage period (raw electrical conductivity data in Appendix 2). Storage temperature and seeds moisture content had an effect on the rate of conductivity increase. With high storage temperature and high seeds moisture content gave higher rate of increase in electrical conductivity in time.
Vigour tests, such as electrical conductivity test, often correlate well with other aspects of seed quality. Graph 2 shows there is a negative correlation between seed steeped water electrical conductivity and probit percentage viability and the correlation coefficient is - 0.8875. Data details and calculation of the correlation coefficient are in Appendix 3.
Although all the constants, KE, CW, C2, in Equation 4 were tentatively estimated and in theory, Equation 4 could be used to predict pea seeds longevity in any temperatures and moisture contents, however, caution must be taken.
CW estimation was base on only 2 moisture contents, 15.7 and 13.5 % and a two points interpolation can only give an approximate estimation. Also, no data were available outside these moisture contents in this experiment and extrapolation of CW could easily lead to erroneous results. In actual fact, Ellis et al. (1989) demonstrated that as moisture content lower, there would come to a limit to the logarithm relationship between seed moisture and longevity. For pea seeds, Ellis et al. (1989) suggested that this critical moisture content is around 6.2 %, and lowering of moisture content below this critical point will not improve longevity. Conversely, as moisture content increases, there will be a point where free water become available inside the seeds and Equation 4 longevity model no longer hold.
The temperature term in Equation 4 is a simplification from the original term in Equation 2, which shows that relationship between logarithmic of longevity and temperature is not linear. Equation 4 is only an approximation on Equation 2 over a small range in temperatures. Similar to moisture content, any extrapolation of longevity from 50   C or 40   C to sub-zero temperature using Equation 4 is very likely to give erroneous results. Moreover, C2 in Equation 4 was tentatively estimated by using just one single result at 40   C, and this value is subject to substantial error.
Graph 2 shows there is a negative correlation between seed steeped water electrical conductivity (vigour) and probit percentage viability. However, this relationship would not be obvious if linear percentage scale was used to plot Graph 2 and this is even more if viability is very high. Small changes in viability are subjected to sampling error and difficult to detect. Even when detected, the very small drop in viability would seem rather insignificant when compare with the increases in electrical conductivity or decrease in vigour, and this would make vigour and viability appear to be independent. This also shows the important of using either electrical conductive vigour test or seed storage aging germination test when trying to estimate the quality of a seed lot. If only a single germination test was used to estimate the seed quality without aging, an apparent non-significant drop in germination would have a significant effect on the seeds longevity.
Graph 1 shows the viability and normal seedlings curves with the same storage temperature and seeds moisture contents are almost parallel and this implies every individual seed would go through similar period of time between at the point of losing the ability to produce normal seedlings and death, no matter when this process take place (this also implies the 2 curves would give similar CW). In the case of storage temperature at 50   C with 15.5 % moisture content, this period is about 2.8 days and 5.4 days for 13.5 % moisture content. This shows the length of this period is affected by the seeds storage environment, harsher environment would give shorter period and gentler environment would give longer period. However, the height difference of the two curves would always be the same, which is the difference of seed lot constant, Ki between viable seeds and normal seedlings survival curves. As the high differences between the two curves in probit percentage scale are the same through out storage period, this implies number of seeds, which produce abnormal seedlings, will be highest when viability is near 50%. Also, the storage conditions would not affect the percentage of abnormal seedling at a particular viability when the same seed lot go through deterioration in storage (i.e. two lots of seed originally taken from the same seed lot and stored in different temperatures and moisture contents, as long as the final viability is similar, they would have similar percentage of abnormal seedlings in germination tests).
There should be more replicated samples in the germination test. As 3 replicates of 40 seeds were a relatively small sample size when one try to observe small changes in viability often less that 1%. As probit percentage of viability data from the shorter storage periods (data near the Y - axis) shown, they were subjected to a lot of noise. The germination test would also be more effective, if there were more samples taken around the periods when viability was near 50%, as this would improve the accuracy for the estimation of standard deviation of the frequency distribution of seed deaths,    .
Before any tests were carried out on the seeds, it might be beneficial to humidify the seeds first, as this might avoid the possibility of imbibition damage during rehydration. Germination test were carried out in relatively dark environment and the seedlings showed sign of etiolation and this made checking of normal germination more difficult, as no normal chlorophyll pigment developed in the seedlings.
Despite of all the shortcomings in this experiment, the estimated value of CW, 4.3 to 5.0 is similar when compares with other published value, 5.39 suggested by Ellis et al. (1989). This probably shows the robustness of the underlying philosophy behind the testing method and theory about seeds longevity.
