GG Brown and Associates have performed compaction and Atterburg limit tests on the Gold Art Clay as requested. Tests were performed in general accordance with ASTM D-698-07e1. The Proctor test was used to determine the compaction curve. It was determined that the maximum dry density for Gold Art Clay is 110.6 pcf. The Atterburg Limits of liquid limit is 39% and plastic limit is 25.3%. The optimal water content is 15%. The clay was classified as CL in the group of leen clay.
A letter dated October 16, 2007 from William Piper Associates, requested GG Brown and Associates determine group symbol and name for Gold Art Clay as well as the Atterburg Limits, the optimum water content and the maximum dry density. We have completed testing on November 6, 2007 using the Protector Test to determine the compaction curve of the soil of interest and therefore to determine the maximum dry density and the optimal water content as well as Atterburg limit tests to determine the Atterburg limits of the soil.
The soil was previously sent to G.G. Brown Associates. The soil is the Gold Art Clay.
The Compaction Test (proctor test) was used to determine the maximum dry unit weight and the optimal weight and was tested according to the following;
ASTM D698-07e1: Standard Test Methods for Laboratory Compaction Characteristics of soil using Standard Effort
The Atterburg Limits were found and tested according to the following:
ASTM D 4318-05: Standard Test Methods for Liquid Limit. Plastic Limit and Plasticity Index of Soils.
The Proctor test was performed to determine the compaction curve for a soil of interest, to include the determination of the maximum dry unit weight and the optimal water content for the Gold Art Clay. Mechanical compaction is the most common and effective way of stabilizing soil and prior to compaction in the field; the compaction characteristics should be tested and determined.
The Atterburg Limits Tests were performed to determine the liquid limit and the plastic limits of the soil. The water contents separating the transition from a semi solid state to a plastic and a plastic to a semi liquid state are called the plastic limit and the liquid limit respectively. The water content in soil significantly influences its behavior. And the difference between the liquid limit and the plastic limit is an indicator of potential problems
The detailed procedures for both tests can be found in Appendix A of this report.
The group symbol and group name were determined to be CL and leen clay respectively. This is because the PI is greater than 7.
The Atterburg limits were determined to be the following:
These values calculated from our test results, a full table of data results is included in Appendix B.
The Plastic Limit corresponds to the water content at which the soil will begin to crack when rolled out into a diameter of 3mm.
The liquid limit was calculated by comparing the number of blows to the water content. Table 1 summarizes the data. The liquid limit corresponds to the water content at 25 blows.
From this table, the data can be plotted and seen in Graph 1. From this graph, a trend can be seen. As the water content increases, the number of blows to bridge the gap in the test decreases.
The maximum dry density and optimal water content were to be the following:
When the data from Table 2 is plotted against each other along with the Zero Air Voids line, the compaction curve can be found as in Graph 2.
From this graph it is clear where the maximum water content and dry unit weights are obtained.
These values calculated from our test results, a full table of data results is included in Appendix C. From the results found in the laboratory, the optimum moisture content is lower in comparison to that of the empirical correlation ( about 18%) provided in Figure 1 of Appendix E. This could be because of the fact that some of the moisture was lost while conducting the experiment. However the values are very similar as they were only about 3% away from each other. See Appendix E.
Sample calculations form both tests are included in Appendix D.
Using the Proctor Test, the Max Dry Density was determined to be 110.6 pcf and the Optimal Water Content was determined to be 15%. The ASTM soil symbol and group name was determined to be CL and leen clay, respectively.
From the laboratory determined optimal water content that was found, it is determined that it is only slightly lower in comparison to the empirical correlation provided in Figure 1 of Appendix E. The empirical relation estimates that the optimal water content (based on the values of the liquid limit and the plastic limit) is about 18%, where as that found in the laboratory was 15%.
From the Atterburg Limit test the liquid limit was determined to be 39% and the plastic limit was determined to be 25.3%.
