The purpose of this experiment is to determine both the specific gravity and absorption capacity of coarse aggregate. This information will be used in the proportioning of concrete mixtures. Specific gravity is the characteristic generally used to calculate the volume occupied by aggregate. Absorption capacity describes the change in mass of an aggregate due to water absorbed in the pores.
This test is performed in accordance with ASTM C127: Standard Test Method for Density, Specific Gravity, and Absorption of Coarse Aggregate. The following materials are required:
Table 1 gives the data from the lab and the appropriate calculations. From this data the Bulk Specific Gravity at the SSD condition (BSGSSD) is 2.57 and the Bulk Specific gravity at the OD condition (BSGOD) is 2.49. The absorption capacity is 3.23%.
The values of absorption and specific gravity for aggregate that is not oven dried before it is soaked in water can be significantly higher that aggregate that is oven dried. (1) Larger particles, especially those over 75 mm, may be too thick to allow water to penetrate the pores to the center of the aggregate particle. Therefore it is critical that the procedure state if the aggregate was oven dried and, if so, how long it was submerged in the water. In this case, since the data is being found for a concrete mixture (where the aggregate will be in its natural, moist state) the aggregate was continuously submerged.
Another important procedural point that must be followed to assure reproducible results: The experimenter should assure the aggregate is fully submerged when finding the weight in water.
The purpose of this experiment is to find both the specific gravity and absorption capacity of the fine aggregate. This information will be used in the proportioning of concrete mixtures. Specific gravity is the characteristic generally used to calculate the volume occupied by aggregate. Absorption capacity describes the change in mass of an aggregate due to water absorbed in the pores.
This test is performed in accordance with ASTM C128: Standard Test Method for Density, Specific Gravity, and Absorption of Coarse Aggregate. The following materials are required:
Table 2 gives the data from the lab and the appropriate calculations. From this data the Bulk Specific Gravity at the SSD condition (BSGSSD) is 2.684 and the Bulk Specific gravity at the OD condition (BSGOD) is 2.669. The absorption capacity is 0.553%.
(a) Bulk dry specific gravity, bulk SSD specific gravity, and apparent specific gravity are all calculated in experiments 1 and 2. The key concept to understanding these terms is understanding the concept of pores in aggregate particles. A single particle of aggregate has a total volume that includes solids and pores. At the SSD condition the pores are filled with water and at the OD condition the pores are filled with air.
From these equations, these bulk and apparent specific gravities can be compared. In general
(b) Reproducible Results: In order to produce reproducible results, an accurate SSD condition needs to be obtained. It is critical that this is performed correctly, because the basis of all calculations relies on the appropriate SSD weight.
The purpose of this experiment is to determine the particle size distribution for fine and coarse aggregates using the sieve method. This data will be used to select proportions for concrete mixtures.
This test is performed in accordance with ASTM C136: Standard Test Method for Sieve Analysis of Fine and Coarse Aggregates. The following materials are required:
Tables 3 and 4 give data from experiment 3. Table 3 gives the sieve gradation analysis for coarse aggregate. Table 4 gives the sieve gradation analysis for fine aggregate. Figures 1 and 2, following the data charts, show the particle distribution graphically. As both the tables and figures demonstrate, both the fine and coarse aggregates do not meet ASTM specifications at some point in the distribution.
(a) In figures 1 and 2 the upper and lower limits for the ASTM standards are plotted in the lighter color. As demonstrated, both the coarse and fine aggregates do not fully meet ASTM specifications. The coarse aggregate does not fall in the range specified by ASTM standards for 3 of 4 given standards. The fine aggregate meets specifications for all sieves besides the #50 and #100 sieves. This tells us that both specimens are not appropriate for use in construction.
(b) In order to obtain reproducible results it is crucial that the aggregate is agitated for the appropriate amount of time. It is also necessary to weigh all aggregate sample retained in a sieve. Loss of any particles causes error in the calculations.
The purpose of this laboratory is to determine the minimum and maximum unit weights of coarse aggregate. This data will be used to select proportions for concrete mixtures.
This experiment is performed in accordance with ASTM C 29: Standard Test Method for Bulk Density (Unit Weight) and Voids in Aggregate. The following materials are required:
Table 5 demonstrates the data obtained in the lab, as well as the resulting calculations of specific gravity. From this data the rodded unit weight () is 1424 kg/m3 and the loose unit weight ( is 1328 kg/m3.
