This document is to serve as the first of two reports for the schematic design of the Wight-Green Building scheduled to be constructed in Ann Arbor, Michigan.
Wolverine Consultants has been working with the structural, environmental and geotechnical consultants, to gather data and put together a preliminary schedule and budget. Thus far the project should break ground on July 1, 2008 and be completed and ready for move in October 6, 2009. We have also determined that the project should be completed with a construction budget around $6,600,000 and a total project cost of $9,650,000, with limited uncertainty. A construction management, along with two versions of a site plan and a LEED certification plan has also been put together.
Wolverine Consultants had put together a construction management plan that will guide the team throughout the design and construction of the Wight-Green Building. We will be responsible for scope and change order management, keeping track of all change orders and forwarding all information on to subcontractors. An analysis of the bid market will be conducted and a packaging strategy will be put together. We will monitor milestones in the schedule to properly manage the design, bidding and construction schedules. Wolverine Consultants will also be responsible for regulatory compliance and permitting strategy. Two site plans have been created and include possible layouts of the parking lot.
The construction cost is approximately $6,600,000 and the total cost for overhead (including contractor fees) is approximately $3,000,000, therefore making the total cost of the project about $9,650,000. The preliminary budget is focused around the current designs from the structural, geotechnical and environmental firms. From our analysis, it has been determined that the main sources of uncertainty that can effect our budget are the hill and site topography, water system, foundation design, window and curtain wall selection, superstructure design and the green roof design. In order to keep track of the budget and this uncertainty, we will carefully monitor all the components that have expected variability, especially the site work. We will work together with the other consulting firms to work to minimize uncertainty.
According to our preliminary schedule the site work will begin on July 1, 2008; the substructure is to be completed on November 24, 2008, the superstructure on January 26, 2009 and exterior walls on July 24, 2009.
37 possible attainable points have been chosen, of which 29 must be accepted in order for the Wight-Green building to be LEED certified. We will be working with the other consultants to maintain and manage all credits and their corresponding documentation.
Thus far we have not come across any unforeseen problems and the project is on schedule. We will continue to work with the other consulting firms and work to keep the project on schedule and budget. The next planned deliverable will be the completion of the schematic design this coming March 2008.
We are enjoying working with you on this project and appreciate your business. If there are any questions you have for my team, please feel free to contact me at my office
Sincerely
Project Manager
