Reinforced concrete buildings from the past have been designed only for gravity loads. This is due to the lack of seismic provisions in codes that were in use before the 1970s. The root of the problem in a structure designed only for gravity loads is the lack of ductility in the structural. Structural engineers understand that it very costly and inefficient to design reinforced concrete (RC) structures to remain elastic during seismic loading. The designer is therefore accepting some safe level of plastic deformation. The capacity of the building to deform up to a safe level without collapsing is described by its ductility. Ductility describes the amount of displacement of a structure into the plastic level versus the yield displacement. It has been observed in recent earthquakes that RC concrete buildings which were designed to earlier codes experienced substantial structural damage due to inadequate lateral load resistance and limited ductility.
There are many different types of retrofitting techniques which in turn have different effects on the structures structural capacity. Some of these effects include: increase resistance, increase stiffness, decrease deformations (drift), increase ductility, and to allow stresses to distribute uniformly throughout the structure. When a building has been identified as a possible candidate for a retrofit, several factors will dictate the type of rehabilitation that will be implemented. First the engineer must meet with owner of the building and decide upon a future level of performance. The criteria for this performance will dictate the level of retrofitted needed. Second some analyses have to be done in order to asses the actual lateral load resistance and potential failure modes of the structure. With this analysis one can identify the weakest and most vulnerable components of the structure. It must be noted here that the design of a new structure varies largely from a retrofit design. In the design of a new structure the designer can implement ductile detailing which eliminates the problem of analyzing the structure for possible non-ductile modes of failure. The analysis for the simulation and evaluation of the behavior of an existing structure is in a state of development and is still short of being reliable and accurate for wide application (A. Ghobarah). Currently we have linear and nonlinear types of procedures for this analysis where we can perform a static or dynamic procedure. The advantages and limitations of these procedures will be discussed below.
After a structure has been analyzed, and its capacity has been quantified and the future needed capacity a retrofit scheme can be selected. The technique to be implemented should be the most efficient and safe procedure available. These techniques have evolved substantially since the 1990s and include retrofits at global or member levels. Their different applications and advantages to reinforced concrete structures will be discussed ahead. Through this report a structural engineer should gain a broader knowledge about the different problems that today's RC structures are facing and some basic information in the techniques to evaluate the structure and retrofitted.
