While manus marriage, in which the wife literally enters into the 'hand,' or control, of her husband, was virtually obsolete by the end of the Roman Republic and the writing of many of these Cases, the practice is nevertheless mentioned by many jurists in their discussions of marriage rituals and contracts. In contrast to the later free consensual marriage of the Roman Empire, manus marriage allowed the wife to break away from the patria potestas and familia of her father and enter into the familia of her husband while at the same time assuming his agnatic relationships. Although a wife in manus might eventually rise to the elite position of mater familias and take on added responsibilities within her new familia, her power and independence were still greatly restricted by the manus of her husband and potentially his pater familias since she was in the position of a daughter (loco filiae) to her husband. However, the locus filiae of a wife in manus did grant her some benefits not inherent in free marriage, such as her right as a sua heres to inherit from both her husband and children. Nevertheless, the seemingly seamless transition from manus marriage to classical "free" marriage provided the wife with a greater amount of independence from her husband while still remaining subject to the patria potestas of her original pater familias.
Not only do manus marriage and the later classical "free" marriage differ greatly in practice throughout the course of the marriage, but they also vary significantly in their ceremonial rituals for establishing the union. Under classical "free" marriage, the legitimacy of the marriage was determined primarily by the existence of conubium, adulthood, and consent of all involved parties (Case 13). The conubium and age requirements fall under the modern requirements of capacity, and the consent requirement was necessary for at least the bride and groom and possibly their patres familiarum if they were still alieni iuris. However, aside from the deductio in domum, the procession of the bride to the home of her new husband, and possibly some marriage documents, no formal process or ceremony for "free" marriage existed. But as Gaius describes in his Institutiones 1.110-113 in Case 19, there were once three specific ways for women to enter a manus marriage -- although he claims that only one was still in use in his time.
Of the three methods of entering a manus marriage, Gaius states that only coemptio was still in use during his time. Like adoption and emancipation, this imaginary sale used the mancipation ritual for transferring the bride into the family of the groom. Although no money actually changed hands, this ceremony transmitted the patria potestas of the bride's father to the manus of the groom. In confarreatio, another archaic Roman ceremony for establishing manus marriage, a sacrificial cake (farreum) was presented to Jupiter Farreus in a ritual before ten witnesses. However, this practice fell into disuse because of its unfavorable manus connection and soon became associated only with the ancient priesthoods due to the requirement that all flamines be sons of couples married by confarreatio. The final method for entering a manus marriage, usus, ensured that all women would eventually become subject to a manus marriage regardless of their type of marriage ceremony as long as they lived for one continuous year with their husbands. However, a wife in manus could avoid such an outcome by spending at least three nights of the year away from the house of her husband. As Barry Nicholas says in An Introduction to Roman Law, " "
Under the Twelve Tables, as Gaius describes in his Institutiones 3.1-3 in Case 37, the rights of succession for an intestate pater familias fall first to his sui heredes, or his privileged heirs. These sui heredes would include not only the children-in-power of the pater familias, but also his wife in manus. In this respect, the wife is in the position of a daughter (loco filiae) and has the same right to inherit from her husband as her children do. Since a wife in manus also adopts her husband's agnatic relationships by severing her own, she can therefore inherit from their children and vice versa as well -- a practice that is nearly impossible in intestate succession under classical free marriage since the wife would have remained in the familia of her own father. Despite this added benefit under intestate succession, a wife in manus was still subordinate to her husband because of her relation to him as a daughter and therefore a granddaughter to his own pater familias. While the wife in manus does fully take on the position of a daughter in this respect, she is not literally a daughter in regard to the patria potestas of her husband or his pater familias. Although the wife does remain subject to her husband's manus, this form of control is not equivalent to the unilateral authority of patria potestas. Just as the wife in a free marriage retains some rights over her husband, especially in the requisition of the dowry, the wife in manus could not be sold, given in adoption, or executed (without a consilium) by her husband. Since patria potestas often granted these rights to a pater familias over his children-in-power, the wife in manus is not literally in the position of a daughter with respect to patria potestas. Rather, this term is applied more to her benefit in some matters, such as intestate succession.
Unlike in classical free marriage, however, the wife in manus relinquished all property to her husband's control. As Gaius says in his Institutiones 3.83 in Case 38, "For when ... a woman enters into manus, all her property both incorporeal and corporeal, as well as what is owed to her, ... is acquired for (her husband), except for those things lost through her change of (family) status" (91). However, in the same Case, Cicero states in his Topica 23, "When a woman comes into her husband's manus, everything that belonged to the woman becomes her husband's as a dowry" (91). Whereas Gaius implies that the wife's property becomes the husband's regardless, Cicero's reference to the transfer of property as a dowry suggests that the wife may have been able to recover it in the event of divorce or the death of her husband. Nevertheless, the fact that Sp. Carvilius Ruga was able to retain his wife's dowry after his wife failed to bear him any children suggests that even if the husband obtained his wife's property under the pretense of a dowry, it became his nonetheless. However, the dispute surrounding this decision may have led to the eventual right of the wife in a "free" marriage (or her pater familias) to sue for the actio rei uxoriae, or the claim for return of the dowry. This extended the protections awarded to the wife and her property greatly from the provisions of manus marriage while still defending her husband's interests as well.
Another example in which a wife's interests were better protected under the conditions of classical "free" marriage was in the acquisition of property. While a wife in a "free" marriage maintained some control over her dowry and other property provided that she was sui iuris, a wife in manus could acquire property only for her husband as stated in Case 39. The husband's ability to acquire property through his wife in manus further emphasizes the wife's position as a daughter (locus filiae) since the pater familias typically acquires property through his children-in-power and slaves. Further, the wife in manus would not even be allowed to accept an inheritance without the knowledge and consent of her husband. However, as in Case 114, this practice seems like it would encourage deception and apathy on the part of those-in-power and wives in manus because the incentive to benefit the pater familias lessens alongside the decreased personal profit. As long as the wife in manus is unable to acquire any property for herself, she is disinclined to run the household properly since she does not even have control of her own slaves or household goods. Without these basic rights, the wife in manus would be incapable of functioning on her own within the household without being at the discretion of her husband -- essentially making her worthless to the household.
Due to the many problems for women inherent in manus marriage, the subsequent transition to classical free marriage is not entirely unexpected. While this alteration seems to have had no transitional period, many of the adjustments follow logically from the problems of the Cases on manus marriage discussed by the jurists. The position of a wife in manus to her husband as equivalent to that of a daughter to her father led to problematic issues regarding intestate succession, property management, divorce, and the overall authority of patria potestas. Since wives in manus often relinquished all their property to their husbands without any hope of restitution or new acquisition for themselves, they could be left with very little or nothing in the event of divorce or the death of their husbands. While the locus filiae of a wife in manus allowed her to inherit her husband's property through intestate succession, this stipulation was no longer necessary under the new dowry laws of classical free marriage, which allowed a wife to regain control of her dowry for self-reliance and remarriage. Similarly, this locus filiae created problems for the execution of patria potestas since a pater familias did not have the same degree of control over his wife in manus as he did over his children-in-power. Also, without the intervention of her original pater familias, a wife in manus had little recourse against her husband or his pater familias in the event of abuse, adultery, or squandering of property. Although a husband's lack of control over his wife in classical free marriage may have presented some problems, the protections granted to the wife by the preservation of the patria potestas of her father outweighed the drawbacks of potential marital discord.
