The explicitly violent and sexual language employed by the "authors" of Greco-Egyptian ἀγωγὴ spells raises several important questions about the relationships between the people implicated in and by these spells. Does the author/spell-caster/client genuinely desire the extreme physical, mental, emotional, and erotic subjugation of the target individual, or does this exaggerated language reflect a generic tendency somehow related to the perceived operation of Greek love-magic? If the former, then what cultural attitude(s) permit(s) the expression of sexual desire in the form of such aggressive discourse? If the latter, then what specific aspect of an ἀγωγὴ spell demands the use of this language? Finally, can discussion of this problem shed any light on the agency or pragmatic operation of the magical procedures involved in an ἀγωγὴ spell? I contend that a close examination of PGM IV.297-4341 and the activated spells in the Supplementum Magicum
Before an examination of these relationships can be assayed, it is necessary to examine the individuals involved in a given ἀγωγὴ spell. In the case of activated spells derived from a handbook, at an absolute minimum, three individuals must have been involved in the casting of a spell – the author of the model, the spell-caster who adapted the spell,3 and the specific client who purchased the spell – in addition to the target individual. This classification of the human agents in an agogē spell was motivated by Versnel's discussion of the individuals involved in healing charms: "the basic rôles or participants are the practitioner/magician, the patient/client and the object (the disease)."
Although the magical language of Greek spells obfuscates the "real" social status of their human agents, several factors may indicate the existence of a hierarchical relationship between author, spell-caster, and client that was defined in terms of competency in the magical arts.8 Frankfurter affirms that literate experts attained "a unique prestige in the community" as a result of their magical expertise and connection to established religion.9 He locates this proficiency in their ability to "transform the rational or 'informative' sense of sacred tests into a 'performative' sense, producing the numinous, empowered letter, amulet, or edible verse out of the official words, prayers, and pages of scripture."
The relationship between the spell-caster and the original author of the agogē spells contained in the magical handbooks is more speculative. If Frankfurter's assertion that the PGM spells were the product of Egyptian temple priests versed in both Egyptian and Greek magical traditions, then there is no apparent class-differentiation in magical proficiency between the original authors and the spell-casters who activated the spells. However, many of the PGM spells are introduced by claims of their spectacular efficacy,11 and in some cases, attribution to a named magical figure, sometimes linked to Thessaly, Syria, or Egypt, areas frequently associated with legendary magical power and expertise.12 While these claims are clearly a type of advertisement for the spell designed to encourage its use, they base their claim to authority on an implied universal
The human actors implicated in these agogē spells form a hierarchical chain of magical authority, ultimately derived from the realm of the mythical and/or legendary mages of a more ancient time or exotic location, and, to a certain degree, separate from the normal hierarchical relationships of these actors within the social structures of Greco-Roman Egypt. Namely, the client and/or target of any given activated spell may have occupied a higher social status than the spell-caster in everyday activities, especially if the spell-caster was an itinerant practitioner; however, within the context of magical activities, the spell-caster always operated as the more prominent individual, although subordinated to the absent author of the spell. This authoritative model for the participants in agogē spells provides a focus for the analysis of the of the language directed at the target and the νεκυδαίμων in the logoi of these spells.
The language employed by the authors of many of the agogē or erotic spells in PGM and the Supplementum Magicum involves extreme violence and/or explicit sexual actions directed towards the target of the spell: "incantations that are... dense with imagery connected with torture and cruelty."
Similar terminology is repeated in lines 372-383 and 395-6, where the spell-caster is instructed to "add the usual" (κοινόν), presumably a text similar to lines 350-356 and 372-383. Moreover, the desired result of the spell is also expressed to the νεκυδαίμων in dominating sexual language at the conclusion of the logos:
Other instances of this mode of discourse can be found in PGM IV.1390-1495, PGM IV.1469-1595, PGM XVI.1-75, PGM LXI.1-38, PGM CI.1-53, and Supplementum Magicum 46-50, among others.
The elements contained in these expressions of violence include, as mentioned above, the physical discomfort and torture of the target and the restraint of the target's (normal) sexual activities until the target fulfills the client's desires. These conditional commands are typically interspersed with claims of power by the author/spell-caster, voces magicae, and other injunctions to the νεκυδαίμων. The conditional aspect could possibly be seen as an alleviation of the violence; however, the expressed objective of these logoi, the absolute subjugation of the target, undermines any perception of mitigation. In the activated spells of the Supplementum Magicum that follow the basic format of PGM IV.296-46, the νεκυδαίμων is instructed to make the target inseparable from and subject to theclient: "ἀδιαχώριστὸν μου αὐτὴν ποιήσῃς μέχρι θανάτου, ἵν' ἔχω αὐτὴν Ἡρωνοῦν, ἣν ἔτεκεν Πτολεμαΐς, ὑποτεταγμένην ἐγὼ Ποσιδώνιος, ὃν ἔτεκεν Θσενουβάσθις, ἰς τὸν ἅπαντα χρόνον τῆς ζωῆς μου" (46.24-26).16 The desired result of an agogē spell is expressed elsewhere in PGM as the complete suppression of the target's thoughts and will to theclient: "καὶ μεταζήτησιν τῶν ἐμῶν τύπων καὶ θέλησιν τῶν ἐμῶν θελημάτων, ἄχρις ἄν ποιήσῃ τὰ ἐπιτασσόμενα αὐτῇ ὑπ' ἐμοῦ" (PGM IV.1429-1431).17 The result of these assertions is the complete effacement of the target's identity, which is replaced by the desires of the client.
The exaggerated, almost sadistic, aggression expressed in the logoi of agogē spells has created a locus of discussion for the interpretation of Greek erotic magic. While understanding the ambivalent hostility of Greek attitudes towards erotic love in a non-magical context can explain some of the violence, the sheer density and brutality of these images in erotic magic defies explanation through "traditional descriptions of the effects of erotic seizure."
The analogy between erotic magic and lyric/elegiac poetry also fails to elucidate another central question concerning violent language in erotic magic: when the author/spell-caster/client commanded the νεκυδαίμων to torture the target, did theclient believe that the target would actually suffer? And, if he did, was the target's suffering physical or mental? In his analysis of Pythian 4, Faraone asserts that "the practitioner hoped to compound the naturally deviant behavior of the bird with the discomfort and madness caused by torture, and to project the resulting mental turmoil and physical anguish onto the victim."
The violence expressed in these spells is reminiscent of the language employed by the Greek defixiones which bind (καταδέω) the body-parts and (sexual) organs of their targets. The self-description of PGM IV.296-46 as a φιλτροκατάδεσμος indicates that a relationship between defixiones and erotic magic was potentially recognized by the author(s) of the PGM spells, and, indeed, the concept of "binding" or "restraint" forms a motif in both the logos and praxis of many of these spells.22 Faraone analyzed the expression of violence in the curse-tablets within the agonistic context of Greek legal and commercial enterprise, and has concluded that in these circumstances the aggression was not imagined as literal violence.23 The author/spell-caster/client of a given curse tablet assimilated the violent language of the spell to the "restraint" of thetarget, transformed from literal to magical through the operation of the chthonic divinities, and resulting in theclient overcoming his/her competitor(s).24
However, this disjunction between magical discourse and the real social relationships that provide the context for Greek magic has generally not been extended into the framework of erotic magic.25 Instead, interpretations of the agogē spells have focused on other aspects of the spells,26 or assumed that the violence reflected a generalized societal perception of women in Roman Egypt. Versnel, in his discussion of healing charms, approaches magical rhetoric as the transgression of the normal bounds of discourse:
This exaggerated approach to language provides a potential explanation for the degree of brutality employed in the logoi of many erotic spells, although it does not completely explain the rationale behind this inversion of normal discourse. Unless we are to assume that all the practitioners andclients of Greek love magic bordered on the sadistic, the exaggerated and violent language employed in the logoi should have some basis in the operation of the spells or in their underlying magical "logic". However, the human actors – author, spell-caster,client, andtarget – are not the only entities involved in the production and activation of Greek erotic magic.
The logoi of agogē spells are typically addressed to one or more νεκυδαίμονες, the unfulfilled spirits of people who died prematurely (aōroi) or by violence (biaiothanotoi),28 and who functioned as the direct agents of the spell.29 These "restless" spirits existed in a state of suspension between life and death which "would both facilitate interaction with the living and make them easier prey for the practitioner – they were neither impeded nor protected by the walls of the Underworld."
Since these Greek erotic spells represent the νεκυδαίμων as an active participant in the magical process, the interaction between the spell-caster and the νεκυδαίμων adds another dimension to the analysis of the hierarchical and/or violent relationships between the human actors described in the logoi. The use of νεκυδαίμoνες in Greek magic depended on the ability of magical practitioners to communicate effectively with the spirits of the dead, and assumed a certain degree of consciousness, at least on the part of the "restless" dead. Johnston asserts that "Greek funerary rites attest to the expectation that the deceased had some sentience in the afterlife."
Some details about how the author/spell-caster viewed the νεκυδαίμoνες can be reconstructed from language incorporated into the logoi. The spirits used in erotic magic were apparently tied to the location of a tomb, or cemetery, "ὁρκίζω πάντας δαίμονας τοὺς ἐν τῷ τόπῳ τούτῳ,"
In order to impose effective limitations on the action of νεκυδαίμoνες, the spell-caster needed to establish him/her-self as more powerful than the spirit invoked by the spell. In PGM IV.296-466, the author/spell-caster establishes a subordinate role for the νεκυδαίμων through a series of commands and invocations interspersed with his instructions concerning thetarget of the spell:
The formulaic language – (ἐξ)ορκίζω σε, νεκύδαιμον, κατὰ (τοῦ ὀνόματος)... – used by the spell-caster to establish control over the νεκυδαίμων "first shows up in the Greek magical tradition in North Africa during the first century CE, presumably by way of Jewish rituals used to exorcize evil demons."
The most extreme examples of the author/spell-caster asserting his/her dominance over the νεκυδαίμων occur in those instances where the spell-caster assimilates him/her-self to the divine entities implicated by the voces magicae pronounced in the spell.46 This quasi-rhetorical device claims divine authority for the spell-caster and links him/her directly to the very gods and goddesses who normally have supremacy over the νεκυδαίμoνες. This appears to be a somewhat puzzling strategy, since the νεκυδαίμoνες could presumably differentiate between a human spell-caster and a god. Moreover, it was apparently used sparingly, since this formula is repeated only once in the Supplementum Magicum spells which derive from PGM IV.296-466.47 However, the repetitive nature of the commands and exhortations directed at the νεκυ-δαίμoνες may demonstrate that they were viewed as vulnerable, and not particularly intelligent, by Greek magical practioners;48 their marginal status rendered them susceptible to manipulation since they were isolated from the social structures of both the living and the dead, and hence had no external support in resisting this compulsion.
In addition to the direct "ἐγὼ (γάρ) εἰμι voces magicae" formula found in the logos of PGM IV.296-466, the author/spell-caster of PGM LXI.1-38 orders the νεκυδαίμων to obey his commands "ὅτι περὶ ἐμὲ ἔχω τὴν δύναμιν τοῦ μεγάλου θεοῦ, οὗ οὐκ ἔξεστιν ὄνομα οὐδενὶ ὀνομάζειν, εἰ μὴ μόνῳ ἐμοὶ διὰ τὴν αὐτοῦ δύναμιν voces magicae" (23-25). This spell presents a more cautious claim: not directly assimilating the spell-caster to the god, but instead implying that the spell-caster has an exclusive relationship with the divinity based on secret magical knowledge. Although this is a subtle distinction, it may indicate that the author/ spell-caster employed a different approach to the divine power(s) invoked to control the νεκυδαίμων, or that he/she was working from a variant magical tradition.49 A final example combines an adaptation of the "ἐγὼ εἰμι" formula with a second aspect of the interaction between spell-caster and νεκυδαίμων, the common "μὴ μου παρακούσῃς" command. In PGM CI.1-53, a particularly forceful agogē spell, the spell-caster orders the spirit, "Do not disobey me, but do [it] quickly, because ordering you is voces magicae" (23-28). This particular occurrence directly associates the author/spell-caster's assimilation of divine power to the coercion of the νεκυδαίμων.
Many PGM spells which employ νεκυδαίμoνες include expressions which instruct or comment upon the obedience of the targeted spirit. This terminology establishes the spell-caster's supremacy in relation to that νεκυδαίμων, and constructs an environment in which the spell-caster's commands regarding thetarget of the spell will be successfully completed. In PGM I.247-252, a brief invisibility spell, the spell-caster – after assimilating himself to Anubis, Osiris, and other voces magicae – instructs the νεκυδαίμων, "ὃ ἐὰν ἐπιτάζω ὑμῖν ἐγὼ ὁ δεῖνα, ὃπως ἐπήκοοί μοι γένησθε" (254-255).50 The generality of the command, even in the context of a single-purpose spell, emphasizes the desirability of the total obedience of the spirit. In PGM IV. 2006-2125, a spell to summon a demon assistant, the summoned νεκυδαίμων actually tells the spell-caster, "ὁ θέλεις, ἐπίταξον, καὶ ποιῶ" (2054) in the context of a dream oracle. Another example occurs in the "advertisement" for the second half of PGM I.42-195. The author asserts that "ἐὰν ἐπιτάξῃς, παραυτὰ τὸ ἔργον ἐπιτελεῖ" (97-98).51 The emphasis on rapidity, as evidenced by the common tagline appended to many different types of spells,52 forms an undercurrent in Greek magical discourse. In reference to the instructions given to νεκυδαίμoνες, this prominence may also reflect the practitioner's concern with controlling the spirit – the longer a νεκυδαίμων takes to discharge a spell, the greater likelihood that he will escape the spell-caster's control.
Other spells contain a more forceful version of this type of command: the "μὴ μου παρακούσῃς" formula,53 an implied threat closely associated with the author/spell-caster's assumption of (divine) magical power. The primary meaning of παρακούω, "to hear accidentally or imperfectly," emphasizes the importance of the spoken incantation for these spells, and further evidences that Greek magical practitioners conceived of νεκυδαίμoνες as at least partially capable of verbal communication. The injunction also implies that the νεκυδαίμoνες had the potential to ignore the spell-caster, and hence required persuasion or coercion to perform the action(s) required of them. In Lucian's Φιλοψευδεὶς, this verb depicts an elderly snake's resistance to magical compulsion: "μὴ δυνάμενος παρακούσας τοῦ προστάγματος" (12.21). Although framed as satire, the anecdote reflects the pre-occupation of Greek magical practitioners with exerting control over the νεκυδαίμoνες. In PGM IV.296-466 and the related Supplementum Magicum 46-50,54 the "μὴ μου παρακούσῃς" directive occurs directly after the central invocation of the voces magicae, which includes the reference to the unnamed "name of power." The position of this injunction at the heart of the spell, and its association with an explicit reminder of the spell-caster's superior magical power, reinforces the potency of the command.
Other occurrences of this formula strengthen the coercion of the νεκυδαίμων through the use of direct intimidation: some threaten harm to the recalcitrant νεκυδαίμων, and others threaten the fabric of the universe itself. An example of the first type occurs in PGM IV.2006-2125, "βραδύναντι δέ σοι κολάσεις ἐπενεγκῶ, ἃς οὐ δύνασαι ἐνεγκεῖν" (2096-2097).55 This type of threat attempts to ensure the spirit's cooperation through its self-interest and/or instinct for self-preservation. This implies that νεκυδαίμoνες were, to some degree, self-aware entities capable of perceiving pain or discomfort. The second type of threat operates in a more oblique manner: "ἐαν δὲ παρακούσητε καὶ μὴ ταχέως τελέσηται ὃ λέγω ὑμῖν, οὐ δύνετε ὁ ἥλιος ὑπὸ γῆν, οὔτε ὁ Ἅδης οὔτε ὁ κόσμος οὐκ ἔστιν... ἐὰν δὲ μοι μὴ τελέσητε ἃ λέγω ὑμῖν, κατακαύση ὑμᾶς ὁ Εωνεβυωθ" (Supp. Mag. 45.9-11, 14-15). The author/spell-caster attempts to control the νεκυδαίμων by threatening the order of the cosmos. Although magical operations at least partly depend on the inversion of natural forces, the degree of cosmic disturbance represented by this threat exceeds even normal magical discourse. A combination of the two types occurs in PGM LXI.1-38: "ἦ διακόνησόν μοι πρὸς τὴν δεῖνα, πρίν σοι ἐπαναγκαστικοὺς θεοὺς ἐνέγκω, ἐὰν μὴ πέμψης, ἐπεὶ σιδηρᾶς θύρας ῥήξω αὐτός" (11-13). The deployment of voces magicae in the (ἐξ)ορκίζω formula, along with the implied (or explicit) collapse of the human practitioner's power with the might of the gods apparently convinced the νεκυ-δαίμoνες that the spell-caster had the power to enforce the condition.
In addition to threatening and coercive language, the authors (and spell-casters) of the PGM spells occasionally offered rewards to the νεκυδαίμoνες upon completion of their commands.56 In PGM IV.296-466, the spell-caster offers to "release" the νεκυδαίμων after the target has been successfully attracted: "ἐάν μοι τοῦτο τελέσῃς, ἀναπαύσω σε ταχέως" (384).57 This formula is directly followed by the "ἐγὼ γάρ εἰμι" element, which acts as a reassurance to the νεκυδαίμων that the spell-caster has sufficient authority to fulfill his/her promise, as well as a not-so-subtle reminder of the consequences of disobedience. Three of the corresponding Supplementum Magicum spells employ a similar dismissal phrase: "ἐάν τοῦτό μοι ποιήσῃς, ἀπολύσω σε" (46.27), "ἐάν τοῦτο ποιήσῃς, ἀπολύσω σε" (47.28), and "ἄμ μοι τοῦτο τελέσῃς, λύσω σε ταχέως. (50.71-72). The combination of reward and punishment provided a bi-partite motivation for the νεκυδαίμoνες, dependent on the author/spell-caster's authoritarian role. Significantly, the release promised the νεκυδαίμων in PGM IV.296-466 is apparently the same state it enjoyed prior to the activation of the spell: "ἔγειρον μόνον σεαυτὸν ἀπὸ τῆς ἐχούσης σε ἀναπαύσεως" (369-370).58 Contrary to modern assumptions about the release of an earth-bound spirit, the Greek "restless" dead were apparently content to remain in their liminal state, and none of the instances of this formula implies that the spirit will be sent down to Hades.
The two verbs employed in the dismissal formula, ἀναπαύω and ἀπολύω, have the general sense release.59 The use of ἀναπαύω employed in PGM IV.296-466 appears to be nearly anomalous, as the other examples of this formula in PGM generally employ ἀπολύω (see below). Sophpocles uses ἀναπαύω with the sense "to give rest (from wandering)" in Oedipus at Colonus, "κἀναπαύσατον τὸν πρόσθ' ἐρῆμον τοῦδε δυστήνου πλάνου" (1113-1114), and Demos-thenes employs the verb in "Against Phaenippus" to refer to release from civic involvement "λῃτουργοῦντας καὶ ἐν τοῖς τριακοσίοις ὄντας ἀναπαύειν" (42.25). The primary application of ἀπολύω, in contrast, involves acquittal in legal proceedings: "παῖδας δὲ αὐτοῦ ἀπαχ-θέντας Παυσανίης ἀπέλυσε τῆς αἰτίης."
The employment of ἀναπαύω and ἀπολύω in the context of the PGM spells supports the interpretation of these verbs as technical idioms pertaining to the release of a νεκυδαίμων from the service of a spell-caster, especially in the context of spells which invoke a spirit as an assistant to the practitioner. In PGM I.42-195, the author instructs the spell-caster to observe a particular libation when he releases the star/aerial daimōn/angel summoned for the purposes of an oracle: "ἐπὰν δὲ ἀπολύσῃς αὐτὸν, μετὰ τὸ ἀποστῆναι ἐπίθυε αὐτῷ τὰ προκείμενα καὶ σπένδε οἶνοι, καὶ οὓτως τῷ κραταιῷ ἀγγέλῳ φίλος ἔσει" (170-172). In PGM II.64-183, the spell-caster is also instructed to release a divine entity also summoned for divination: "μαθὼν δὲ ἅπαντα ἀπολύσεις δοξοποιήσας ἀξίως ῥάνας αἵματι περιστερᾶς καὶ ἐπιθύσας ζμύρναν εἰπέ: 'ἄπελθε, δέσποτα voces magicae" (176-178). PGM IV.154-285 records two water divination spells which can summon both gods and νεκυδαίμoνες. At the conclusion of both praxeis, the spell-caster is instructed to release the spirit: "ἐὰν δὲ εἴπῃ, ἀπόλυε αὐτὸν τῇ ἀπο-λύσει" (232-233) and "ἐπὰν δὲ ἐκμάθῃς, ἀπόλυε τὸν θεὸν μόνον τῷ ἰσχυρῷ ὀνόματι τῷ τῶν ἑκατὸν γραμμάτων λέγων" (250-252). The first praxis in this spell appears to support the existence of a generalized dismissal formula, an ἀπόλυσις, perhaps with an attendant ritual that varied with the type of divinity or νεκυδαίμων. Each of these instances implies that the release of the summoned spirit is dependent on the fulfillment of the goal of the spell:63 the same conditional format evidenced in PGM IV.296-466. In PGM LXI.1-38, which displays several other anomalous traits, the spell-caster employs ἀπολύω to refer to the release of the νεκυδαίμων against thetarget: "ἀπολύω σε πρὸς τὴν δεῖνα, τὴν ἔτεκεν ἡ δεῖνα" (10). This apparent inversion of the formula may imply that the spell-caster intended the νεκυδαίμων to have a greater autonomy in the prosecution of this particular agogē spell, or conversely, the author of the spell may have confused or misunderstood the convention.
The passages presented above illustrate some observations concerning the character, status, and function of νεκυδαίμoνες in the magical spells of Greco-Roman Egypt. Within the context of these practices, νεκυδαίμoνες filled the role of the servants of magical practitioners, bound by an asymmetrical conditional coercion. The exceptionally inferior status of the νεκυ-δαίμων, compared to the (exaggerated) magical power and proficiency of the spell-caster, compelled the spirit to accept the terms expounded in the logos of a given spell. Many of these interactions took the form of a double condition: if the νεκυδαίμων completed the demands of the spell-caster, it was released; if it failed to complete its orders, it was tortured. The violent domination of the νεκυδαίμoνες reflects a long-standing cultural apprehension concerning the spirits of the untimely dead,64 and forms a special mode of discourse appropriate to a magical setting. Other factors suggest that the PGM authors viewed these spirits as capable of restricted communication with magical practitioners and cognizant of only a limited recollection of the complexities of human interactions.
The PGM spells portray the νεκυδαίμoνες as identifying only two social roles: master and servant. Although the language employed in these spells does not directly parallel the Greek idioms of slavery and manumission, the existence of a social relationship determined exclusively by power and defined in terms of binary opposition certainly reflects the social realities of a slave-owning community. Bagnall's observation "that though slaves provided much of life's comforts to the slave-owning class, they also posed much of its trouble and even danger,"
The epodē of PGM IV.1928-2005, a prayer addressed to Helios, contains the spell-caster's authoritarian requirement that the νεκυδαίμων assistant he/she is summoning "μηδ' ἀντία μοι φρονέοιτο" (1973). The close similarity between the sentiment of this statement and the expressions in PGM IV.1429-1431, PGM IV.1532-1533, PGM LXI.23-25, PGM CI.33, Supplementum Magicum 45.51-52, and Supplementum Magicum. 47.26 suggests that the
