Between 1890 and 1930, 22.1 million immigrants from Eastern, Central and Southern Europe landed on the shores of the United States. Not only was the great number of immigrants disturbing to those already residing here, but these immigrants brought different experiences, spoke different languages and had different customs.1 The "native" white, Anglo-Saxon, Protestant Americans were alarmed by the impact that these immigrants, virtually none of whom had previous experience with democracy, English or even the English alphabet, would have on American culture, and reacted by attempting to "Americanize" the immigrants and their children, and ultimately, with the passage of the National Origins Act of 1924, by forbidding their entry into the United States. Today, we face a similar issue, although many of the details have changed. We are again in a period of large-scale immigration, and again are facing backlash against immigrants who many perceive as different from "native" Americans, especially those who have come illegally in reaction to restrictive immigration laws. In this paper, I will compare the issues that arose around immigration and education in the early twentieth century with those that are occurring now, namely those concerning use of English in education, school progress of immigrant children, curricula of Americanization and restrictionism.
In the early twentieth century, immigrants were in agreement that their children needed to learn English, and could do so through the schools. Historian Jeffrey Mirel cites ethnic newspapers from that time in which editorials noted the necessity for their children to learn English. For example, a Hungarian editorial in 1890 stated that children needed to learn English, and in 1921 a Greek newspaper stated that it was the duty of every immigrant to learn English.2 The new immigrants were not the only ones with strong feelings about English in the classroom -- feelings against other languages of instruction were so strong, especially during and after World War I, that in 1921 the state of Nebraska passed a law that no language other than English could be used in any school, public or private. Although this law was overturned by the Supreme Court in 1925, its very passage indicated that this was an issue that lawmakers -- and likely, their constituencies -- took seriously.3
Today, educators are faced with similar issues. Immigrant families continue to see schools as places where their children will learn English. Many schools use students' native languages for a time, or offer special English as a Second Language classes for non-native English speakers, but with very few exceptions the expectation is that students will be taught in English as soon as they can function academically in that environment.4 Furthermore, there has been similar legislative action -- in 1998, voters in California passed Proposition 227, ("English for the Children"), which has three goals: early literacy development in English, subject matter instruction in English with a special curriculum tailored to the limited English proficiency students, and early inclusion of limited English proficiency students in mainstream classes for maximum exposure to native English speakers. The law does allow, however, for the continuation of native language instruction programs if enough parents request it.5
In the early twentieth century, immigrants, by and large, were not successful in their school careers. They faced unfamiliar curricula, taught in an unfamiliar language, and had much higher rates of retention than that of the "native" American population.6 Furthermore, many students faced the additional burden of teachers who "despised" and degraded their home lives.7 For example, David Tyack cites a reporter, Adele Marie Shaw, who, in 1903, visited twenty-five New York schools, and reported hearing a teacher call a student a "dirty little Russian Jew."
Today's immigrant children face many of the same difficulties. Although teachers are not likely to overtly denigrate a child, and in fact, are required by law to pay specific attention to their progress, they are more likely to struggle than "native" children.10 Furthermore, although today's society, and thus education, is more multi-cultural, in many ways education is still focused on the traditional, white, Anglo-Saxon, Protestant view of the United States. For example, students now study black history and women's history, but for the most part, they do so in February and March, months dedicated to the study of those topics, and thus students learn about African Americans and women outside of the mainstream of American history rather than as an integral part of that history. Hispanic Heritage month, a time where the impact of immigrants could be specifically highlighted also suffers from being set aside from the mainstream curriculum; furthermore, it occurs in September, a month where academics can get short shrift as teachers and students are reacquainting themselves with the routines and rituals of school.
The immigration of Eastern, Southern and Central Europeans stopped abruptly with the National Origins Act of 1924, which established quota systems tied to the 1890 census, "a sure way of keeping out those national groups which had arrived in great numbers between 1890 and 1915."
There are many similarities between the immigration debates that occurred at the beginning of the twentieth century and those that are occurring now, almost one hundred years later. In fact, the previous debate shares many characteristics of the one that came before, in the mid-nineteenth century, bringing many Irish Catholics immigrants who were also vilified and looked upon with mistrust. Even earlier, Native Americans cannot have been happy at the arrival of the white Anglo-Saxon Protestants who took over their land. Hopefully, the understanding that no matter who we are, those who were here before us looked upon our arrival with suspicion will help us change our attitude towards immigration, and to realize that each new wave of immigrants have brought positive changes to the United States. The current "new wave" will too, if we only give them the opportunity.
