When W.B. Yeats marks the end of a "glorious" age of Irish history in his 1937 poem "The Municipal Gallery Re-Visited," he quotes Edmund Spenser's "The Ruines of Time:"
Yeats wrote to Lady Gregory in January of 1902 to tell her of his offer to edit a "book of selections from Spenser for £35," and comments that he has "a good deal to say about Spenser, but tremble[s] at the thought of reading his six books [of the Faerie Queene]."
Yeats had long acknowledged a Spenserian influence on his work: his first published play, the 1885 Island of the Statues was a self-conscious imitation of Spenser and Shelley. But when set to the task of editing a volume of the great Elizabethan poet, Yeats needed to consider carefully his interpretations of the poet's work and age, and to figure out how they related to his modern world. Bornstein's research reveals that the marginalia in Yeats's working copy of Spenser shows his preoccupations with the texts: "its connection to Ireland, its exaltation of Venus or Intellectual Beauty, and its relation to romantic poetry."
In his Autobiographies, Yeats recalls the beginning of his writing career: "I had begun to write poetry in imitation of Shelley and of Edmund Spenser, play after play -- for my father exalted the dramatic poetry above all other kinds -- and I invented fantastic and incoherent plots."
One of the most notable features of Spenser's poetry is its deliberately archaic, that is positively medieval, use of language. One need not look far to see that Yeats's early poetry often adapted diction and syntax outdated in the late nineteenth century.16 Many volumes of Yeats's collected poems begin with "The Song of the Happy Shepherd," written in 1885 and originally entitled "An Epilogue to 'The Island of Statues,'" and also "The Seeker." The short lyric came from the long dramatic poem The Island of the Statues, which Yeats describes as "an arcadian play in imitation of Edmund Spenser."
Yeats's first poetic success, the long narrative poem The Wandering of Oisin, (1887, revised 1895), also owes much to Spenser, and to the idea, as expressed implicitly in Spenser's archaism and explicitly in his Mutabilitie Cantos, of mourning for a lost order. Blending the Spenserian with the Celtic, Yeats's Niamh, daughter of the Celtic god of love, sings of "faery and man/Before God was or my old line began" (Bk. II, ll. 8-9). Spenser appropriated both the gods of classical antiquity and the fairies of Celtic lore to create the allegorical land of his Faerie Queen. Yeats, re-telling the Celtic myth of Oisin but seeped in Spenser (as well as, as Daniel Albright points out, Tennyson),18 learns from the Elizabethan poet how Celtic ideas might be Anglicized into new poetry. For example, the topos of wandering through a darkly unknowable Celtic Otherworld pervades Spenser: 
In writing about the poem "The Stolen Child," Yeats comments that the poem's place names, Sleuth Wood, Rosses, and Glen-Car, beyond which "lies a leafy island" of fairies to which a human child is carried away, are actual place names around his own Sligo, and that the story itself came from local legend. When Yeats reads Spenser, he is keenly aware that the backdrop of the poet's composition of such poems as the Faerie Queene was his own Ireland, a geography which creeps into Spenser's poetry in the forms of place names and images. Yeats explains at length, for example, that the Arlo Hill of Spenser's Mutabilitie Cantos is a hill near Spenser's home,20 or that "our Irish Aubeg is 'Mulla mine, whose waves I taught to weep.' "
Yeats's Poems of Spenser is subdivided into categorical chapters, the second of which, entitled "Courtiers and Great Men," reveals one of Yeats's crucial attractions to Spenser. Yeats writes of Spenser's courtly affiliations, with the Earl of Leicester and his nephew Sir Philip Sidney, that they "gave his imagination its moral and practical turn." Yeats praises the "pastoral beauty and allegorical images of current events" in The Shepheards Calender, a long poem written under Sidney's influence and dedicated to him, and by no coincidence, Spenser's first great success.23 Yeats, who at the time of writing his essay had been in the close company of Lady Gregory for around four years, recognizes both the financial and artistic benefits of having something like an aristocratic patron. T. McAlindon writes of the way in which Spenser, along with Shakespeare and Jonson, made for Yeats the model of an aristocratic poet particularly appealing, as the Elizabethan and Jacobean periods, positioned in a time of cultural change, resembled Yeats's own place in early modernity:
While Yeats clung to the aristocratic model of patronage and disdain for the middle and lower classes, as did Spenser, he recognized the changing status of the poet in his society. His ideas about the future of the aristocratic poet do not find their full force until later in Yeats's career, when, as he ages and his own "court" at Lady Gregory's Coole Park disintegrates from the deaths of her son and then of Lady Gregory herself, he expresses the courtly ideal most fully, by lamenting its loss in his own life. In his essay on Spenser, Yeats analyzes what he re-titles "The Death of the Earl of Leicester" from the Ruines of Times:
Gazing at a portrait of Lady Gregory in the Municipal Gallery in 1937, he writes in "The Municipal Gallery Re-Visited" that he is "in despair that time may bring/Approved patterns of women or men/But not that selfsame excellence again" (ll. 30-32). He remembers his great patron as "that woman, in that household where/Honour had lived so long, all lacking found" (ll. 34-35). Remembering his earliest days at the estate as opposed to those expressed in the Coole Park poems, he recalls that he then "never foresaw its end" (l. 37). But now that the estate and its Lady are gone, he is comforted, slightly, by "an image out of Spenser," for the destruction of Coole Park after Lady Gregory's death means that unlike the palace of the Earl of Leciester, Coole Park remains as pure as the swans which once inhabited it, not sullied by the "badger."
Yeats learned about more than the enchantment of a courtly world from Spenser. As I discussed above, the otherworldly Faeryland of Spenser's poetry crept much into Yeats's early work. But whereas in his early years Yeats simply re-wrote Spenser's landscapes and adapted many of his images wholesale, his later poetry reveals a more complex understanding of the way Otherworlds can function in poetry, as landscapes of the past, of the mind, of dreams. Re-reading his early poems, Yeats writes in his Autobiography that "it is so many years before one can believe enough in what one feels even to know what the feeling is." He calls this process of catching up a "withering into truth," and one can see that as Yeats aged, the boyhood delight he found in the enchanted worlds of Spenser developed into a reading of the poet complicated by his constantly evolving aesthetic, political, and spiritual ideas. In the essay "Discoveries," Yeats writes of Launcelot (he must mean Malory), that the book "ever a shadow, is more visible in my memory than all its substance," and the same could be said of Spenser.29
In his early poetry, the enchanted realms of Yeats's poetry retain what Coleridge called in Spenser, "the marvelous independence and true imaginative absence of all particular space or time in the Faerie Queen[...]truly the land of the Faery, that is, of mental space[...]a dream, a charmed space."
Yeats's long history with the Occult, beginning in 1887 with his first associations with the Spiritualist Madame Blavatsky in London, meant that the spirit world reached by dreams or séances, was a real, not necessarily merely imagined space. Helen Sword writes that Yeats "sought in the séance room not easy enlightenment but a confirmation of his belief in the slipperiness of human consciousness, the precariousness of language, and the overwhelming complexity of modern life."
Although he insisted on the reality of an Otherworld accessible in the present, Yeats's "most lavishly imagined anti-world,"
Byzantine operates as a symbol, as opposed to an allegory, in Yeats's poems. The distinction is one that is important to Yeats, and one that he fleshes out in his essay on Spenser. He understands both allegory and symbolism as a medium for communication between this world and the next, between body and soul:
Spenser's failure, Yeats believes, was that he "never gets that visionary air which can alone make allegory real," that air which gives Dante and Bunyan's allegories "visionary strangeness and intensity." In his essay "Symbolism in Painting," of 1898, Yeats had begun to establish the difference between allegory and symbolism. He worries that the Faerie Queene's popularity had caused, in England at any rate, "allegory to overtop Symbolism." For Yeats it is William Blake who defines the difference upon which a poet must insist. Suggesting that Blake means symbolism by "vision or imagination," Yeats quotes him: "Vision or imagination is a representation of what actually exists, really or unchangeably. Fable or Allegory is formed by the daughters of Memory."
In one of Yeats's last poems, "The Circus Animals' Desertion," the poet looks back on the various symbols and images he has used throughout his career. He recalls "First that sea-rider Oisin led by the nose/Through three enchanted islands, allegorical dreams,/Vain gaiety, vain battle, vain repose" (ll. 10-12). He realizes that the allegory of his early poem is actually a symbol of his real-life quest for love: "But what cared I that set him on to ride,/I, starved for the bosom of his fairy bride" (ll. 15-16). He had not understood, in his first attempts to write allegorically, that in fact he was writing symbols of his own future. The "counter-truth" of the allegory was the play he wrote, "Countess Cathleen," in which Maud Gonne starred in the leading role. When she literally entered into the world of his poetic creation, that of the play, "this brought forth a dream and soon enough/This dream itself had all my thought and love" (ll. 23-24). In his long quest for Maud's heart, Yeats reveals the truth of Shakespeare's words: "the lunatic, the lover, and the poet are of an imagination compact." There is no difference, for Yeats, between dream and person, between poem and life, between the heart as symbol and the true heart:
Although it was the lack of real-world grounding in Spenser's allegory which Yeats criticized, Spenser's most direct address of real-world issues, his treatise, View of the Present State of Ireland, drew Yeats's wrath. Indeed one of the most difficult aspects of Spenser-the-poet for Yeats was his anti-Irish sentiment, and in the figure of the English poet in 16th century Ireland, Yeats found a locus in which to think about his own Anglo-Irish traumas, of the nightmare of the hyphen. Yeats does not exaggerate the importance of Spenser's ferocious book to the understanding of Irish-English relations. Declan Kiberd begins his massive chronicle Inventing Ireland with the Elizabethan poet: "from the later sixteenth century, when Edmund Spenser walked the plantations of Munster, the English have presented themselves to the world as controlled, refined and rooted; and so it suited them to find the Irish hot-headed, rude, and nomadic, the perfect foil to set off their own virtues."
In his "General Introduction to my Work," Yeats summarizes his difficulties with being partially English by genealogy, and almost wholly English by literary inheritance: "all my family names are English, and I owe my soul to Shakespeare, to Spenser and to Blake, perhaps to William Morris, and to the English language in which I think, speak, and write, that everything I love has come to me through English; my hatred tortures me with love, my love with hate."
Yeats and Spenser both lived in times of great political and literary transition, and one can see the way in which Yeats likens himself, as poet, to Spenser in terms of his unique positioning in time. Spenser, according to Yeats, was the first romantic, and Yeats is the last. Yeats suggests that Spenser was the "last poet of the old order" who mixes his refined "art with his own long-descended, irresponsible, happy art,"
In Spenser's Mutablities Cantos, which were Yeats's favorite of all of his verses, Spenser writes of, as one critic says, "the eruption of a deeply experienced history on what had been Spenser's ideal landscape."
