The bond between Roxana and Amy is not a standard bond between two female companions. It is different from the bond that would exist between two women of equal social standing, and different even from the bond that would exist between a mistress and her maid. It is closest, in fact, to the relationship that exists between a husband and his wife, at least in the way these relationships were regarded during Roxana's time. Roxana thus lives the life of a man in two ways -- one, in being the sole manager of her affairs, and two, in having a kind of wife in Amy.
Amy and Roxana both hold a mutual affection for each other. Amy is devoted to Roxana from the beginning of their misfortunes, "I was not able to pay her the Wages that I was in Arrears to her, yet she would not leave me; nay, and as long as she had any Money...she would help me out of her own."
However, no matter how highly Amy esteems Roxana, Roxana esteems Amy to a much lesser extent. For instance, when Amy vows she would die for Roxana's sake, Roxana's only reply is, "Why that's an Excess of Affection, Amy, said I, I never met with before; I wish I may be ever in Condition to make you some Returns suitable."
Roxana also maintains their status separation from each other throughout the book. Although they are often at equal physical standing with each other, as at the beginning when Roxana has no money, Amy is always under a title of lower rank than Roxana. And when Amy is dangerously close to appearing to have higher morals than Roxana is, Roxana forces the division to re-evolve by forcing Amy into bed with a man she is not wedded to: "but as I thought myself a Whore, I cannot say but that it was something design'd in my Thoughts, that my Maid should be a Whore too, and should not reproach me with it."
The bond between Amy and Roxana is paralleled with the bond between a typical husband and wife during Roxana's time. One example is the general rule that when a woman gets married, all her money and estate are at her husband's disposal, do do with as he pleases: "a Wife must give up all she has...and be upbraided with her very Pin-Money"
Another clear parallel between Amy's relationship to Roxana and that of a wife to a husband lies in the description Roxana often gives of a wife -- that of an upper servant: "a Wife is look'd upon, as but an Upper-Servant."
Roxana's first husband sets the model with which Roxana judges all other marriages, and her life often reflects this model. Roxana's first husband "went abroad, kept Company, hunted much, and lov'd it exceedingly."
However, Roxana lives the life of a man much more successfully than did her first husband. She manages her money and business affairs with such alacrity that she rarely needs the relations she keeps with men for more money: "having large Sums to do with, I became as expert in it, as any She-Merchant of them all."
Amy does, however, tend to stifle Roxana with her affections. Just as such stifling often drives men away from their wives and to mistresses and whores, so might this have been one of the reasons Roxana agreed eventually to marriage. Essentially, Roxana may have gotten married to escape Amy's adoration, which reached a peak of frenzy at the beginning of Roxana's second marriage. Amy's relationship with Roxana was one of extreme affection, as was shown when Amy said she would die for her, and throughout the book when Amy went abroad multiple times for Roxana to manage her affairs. And just as Roxana grew sick of one of her lovers, it may be assumed it was possible for her to grow weary of Amy. Amy is the only person other than Roxana who knows all of Roxana's secrets and everything about her life. When Roxana's daughter Susan is on the verge of discovering everything too, Amy feels the need to murder her. It is not a far stretch to interpret part of her fear for Roxana as jealousy, because Amy wants to be the only one who fully knows Roxana. In fact, Amy began talking of murdering Susan even before they are sure she knows more than she should. It is just after Susan guesses Roxana might be her mother that Amy flies into a rage, and this rage is very likely tinged with jealousy of Roxana. This time, at the beginning of Roxana's second marriage, is also when Roxana begins to become estranged of Amy, and eventually when she forces Amy out of her house.
In short, Roxana stops being a husband to Amy when Amy's affections become stifling, and begins being a wife to her Dutch merchant (who is an exception to the rule of a husband who takes over his wife's money). Roxana lives the life of a man for much of her life, then marries and lives the life of a woman for the rest. Thus, her marriage is not a break from her beliefs, but more a fulfillment of both these ways of living. In a way, Roxana lived a more complete existence because she had the experience of living like a man does, with a kind of wife in Amy, and living as a woman does with a husband. However, it is interesting to note that Roxana was most prosperous while she remained unmarried, a hint either that a woman is more likely to life well if she lives without a husband, or that only a man's way of life can successfully retain money.
