Career Fair 2006, the first step to success. What the career center handbook does not mention is the weeks, even yearlong preparation work before the "big day". The engineering honor societies would normally post all the company information online two weeks before the actual career fair in early September each year, to aid engineering students through what most upperclassmen refer to as "living hell" because of its machine-like elimination process and cruelty. Desperation and depression syndromes are not uncommon among engineering students in the months following because of the impact career fair leaves behind. A friend has once painstakingly described his career fair experience to be "a beggar in a suit", and you see these "beggars" everywhere: dressed in suits from outlet stores; hunched back with heavy backpacks full of engineering books; and beaten harshly by the reality while their eyes scream "desperation".
However, for freshman, career fair is practically a "shopping" spree. One month into college, their resumes are blank while they struggle to calculate an expected GPA. After they face the reality of the market and decide that they are not in any hurry or any competent position in finding an internship or a full-time job, they scurry through suits and ties and high heels while maintain their eye contact perpetually at table level, only to momentarily stop in front of their desired station and collect freebies: from mechanical pencil to stuffed animals to electronic laser tags. Later, they would triumphantly show their despaired upperclassmen their bagful of finds and maybe even spare a toy or two. Little do they know that only a year from now, they would be the ones shinning away from the pepperoni pizza smelled freshman in fear of crumpling and staining their well-ironed shirts.
The competition is still fierce, especially between students of the same major. My friends constantly show their frustration by telling me that they can't believe the guy sitting quietly besides them in their engineering course interviewed for the same company as them and got an offer while they were turned down. Although that being the downside of career fair, it has always been interesting going to class on the day of, and seeing everyone dressed in their best outfit, mostly new clothes since we are used to jeans and Michigan sweatshirts. Even the guy with funky T-shirt of a baby head had changed into a conservative white dress shirt and a pair of black pants over black shoes. "Never ever wear white socks with black shoes and black pants, because they are like flashlights that turn on and off when you are walking." A career center advisor once warned us during a workshop called "Making a Good Impression". To stop all the female audience from nudging their male friends and snickering, the advisor said: "Ladies, you don't want to wear too much jewelry. Stick to the basic: no dangling earrings, over-sized necklaces and definitely no rings unless you are engaged or married. I say this not only because it's very distracting for the recruiters, but also because once I had a girl who wore some really spiky rings on her right hand. Unfortunately she was a 'bone crasher' when it comes to hand shake, and she actually injured the recruiter while shaking hands." I head some grunts and laughs, but also saw some people taking notes religiously. As far as I know, job hunting becomes an obsession as we approach senior year. Even the computer science geek who used to hide in computer labs and program all night long is now eager to talk to Google and Microsoft representatives.
As mechanical as all these tips may sound, this was how I was taught. I remember clearly the first time I felt the pressure to find a job. The job itself may not be that important, but it's the start of a chain reaction: your first internship would help you land an even better internship for next summer, and with two internships on hand, you are in good shape in finding the full-time job you've always dreamt about when you graduate. It's a body stretch before you start climbing the corporate ladder, intimidating but real life. Starting from freshman year, it's all about resume building, work experience. Everything we do seem to end up being that one extra line on our resumes, so that it makes you look worthy to the recruiter you finally get a chance to talk to at the career fair.
When I was volunteering as a resume sorter at my past employer's stand during career fair, I knew there were as many high GPA resumes in the "No" box as the number of low GPA resumes in the "Yes" box; both boxes hidden in the secret corners behind the tables and posters. GPA is definitely not the sole indicator of "how much you worth" in the professional world, in which the concept is a combination of things. You assemble your strengths and even your weaknesses together to present them as a whole, on a sheet of paper, to sell yourself. I was appalled when one of the recruiters hastily handed me my good friend's resume and told me to toss it in the "No" box. Not only is his GPA near perfect but also he has devoted most of his time to volunteering. I couldn't think of anything that's unattractive about him, maybe his Singaporean accent and short and skinny figure? I couldn't help but wonder what had made the recruiter decide that he is not worthy. From afar, behind the shoulders of students and recruiters, he was waving and smiling at me, and then giving me a thumb's up. I smiled back while I stapled his resume with the evaluation sheet and tossed them away with the rest of the unlucky resumes. This kind of things happen all the time, it's a survival of the fittest. No one is there is there to take your hand while you walk those hallways like a resume distributing machine; no one is there to wipe your tears when a company turns you down; and no one is there to give you a pat on the shoulder when you have to talk to a cold faced recruiter enthusiastically.
To look at the bigger picture, everyone in the engineering school "worth" approximately the same when we graduate from Michigan with a Bachelor's degree, although it doesn't feel the same now since we are still in the same pond. In the end, it all comes down to how well you know yourself, because that determines how well you present yourself. A technical communication professor once told me that he had a student coming to him for help months after graduation because he still couldn't get a job offer. The professor couldn't understand why because the student had a perfect 4.0. He had one look at the student's resume and he saw the problem: the student's resume was almost blank. He didn't put in any of the research, work experience, and volunteering he had done because he didn't think they were important enough to mention, and so he stayed humble and jobless.
Since the beginning of freshman year, I've been collecting tips from my own experience, career workshops and even managers themselves on talking to recruiters and doing interviews. After a while, it became a cycle of wanting your resume to look good, so that you are qualified for more things to put on your resume, this in turn makes it look even better, and so on. Like rolling a snowball, it's always hard to squeeze out that small icy sphere in the beginning, but once you have a medium sized ball, it's easy to just roll it in the snow and make it even bigger. This is a path most people would end up choosing in life regardless of all the colorful dreams they have had when they just entered college. In the end, we are all dressed up in the same clothes while trying to sell ourselves to the same companies, but with different speeches and resumes. It's an art, and mastering this art is an unspoken must-learn survival kit before graduation. Job hunting has nothing to do with the real you; successful job hunters are all the same: they are all well dressed, well mannered young professionals who are open-minded extraverts, good at communication, flexible, and positive. They are the live versions of career center handbook, and they are the ones with all the job offers. The cynical guy who once gave me the sarcastic comment of "beggar in a suit" now has offers from five engineering consulting firms, and three world famous corporations. One company even offered to pay his tuition, but he is a totally different person when he is out of the interviewing room, sad and depressed, anti-social and sullen faced because the process stresses him out so much.
By junior year, I've perfected my routine to the point that I can recite my resume and my work experience like my birthday. After all that behavioral interview, case studies, social setting interviews and phone interviews, I know exactly what the recruiters look for and I recognize the "spark" in their eyes when they find what they are looking for. This doesn't mean I've never failed. Of course I have, and that's how I learned and excelled.
I like walking down the hallway in high heels, intentionally making rhythmic "thumps" with my steps. It boosts my confidence for I know I'm already making a statement. Not afraid of facing all the turning heads, I'm making long eye contacts while keeping my head high and a confident smile on my face. Just like that, I learned to talk to recruiters and do interviews. I've also settled myself with two internships so far, and well on my way up the corporate ladder. I am a machine, a well-dressed robot that knows all the dos-and-don'ts, who can camouflage as the type of person most companies want to hire, because I'm just too afraid to walk down the road less traveled by, so I picked the one chosen by most of my precedents.
