 "Who knows the lives and minds of the people who live in the alley?" asks the opening page of Willard Motley's 1947 novel, Knock on Any Door. Is Motley using the contemporary fixation on documenting the "abberant" lives of racial minorities in Chicago's South Side? Or is he making fun of this same trend, implying that nobody can ever know the lives of the poor? Or is he critiqueing readers of African American biography as ethnography, readers who engage in projects of both pathologizing and celebrating Blacks for nonnormative sexual practices? All three attitudes -- critique, exploitation, and mocking irony -- persist in the tone of Motley's portraits of racial and sexual minorities and their relationship to the city. Anne Petry's 1953 novel The Narrows also simultaneously exploits and critiques sensational narratives of the "perverse" sexual practices of the African American urban poor, focusing on an interracial affair between a Black bartender, Link Williams, and a married white Heiress, Camilo Treadway. Both Petry and Motley take the physical places of both normative and nonnormative sexuality very seriously, placing their characters in conflicts with their neighborhoods, domestic spaces, and even their bedroom furniture. In Chicago and New York, between 1920 and 1930, as waves of African American migrants moved to urban centers, these impoverished communities became a key area of societal investigation (by social workers, "Bureaus of Social Hygeine," and urban planners).1 In both cities, "vice" districts of the outlaw sexualities migrated into African American neighborhoods and brought new communities into being around nonnormative gender, racial and sexual practices.2
In this paper, I consider two African American authors of the post-war period, Willard Motley and Ann Petry, who refashion these narratives of the African American neighborhood to trouble the boundaries between racial and sexual transgressions and the normative space of the heterosexual home. Both Motley and Petry simultaneously exploit and critique the sexualization of geography that is a convention of slumming narratives. While Motley belongs more directly to a gay male tradition of nonnormative gender and racial portraits, Petry's The Narrows also destroys the reformist illusion that normative, heterosexual households are the way to uplift "the race." Petry's reclaiming of the domestic space for homoerotic attachments between women runs alongside her critique of the heteropatriarchal assumptions that usually organize "home." Calling attention to the ways that "vice" in embedded in the very marital trappings that reformers urge onto urban Blacks, Petry powerfully subverts the heterosexual/homosexual binary that structures the idea of certain races, or certain neighborhoods, as inherently "perverse."
Willard Motley's 1947 novel Knock on Any Door also provides a trenchant critique of heteropatriarchal models of "home" through descriptions of the married home as a sterile space of violent gender and racial policing. Like the earlier tradition of slumming narratives, the reader of Knock on Any Door is encouraged to form a kind of homoerotic attachment to Nick, the story's "no good" protagonist.3 As Kevin Mumford explains in Interzones, slumming narratives (such as Nigger Heaven, The Walls of Jericho, or White Women/Colored Men) are characterized by black/white homoeroticism and the sexualization of the African American neighborhood as a specific space or geography.4 Motley's vision of Chicago's street life involves a fantasy of multi-racial community that embraces interracial and homosexual attachments. Motley was unsurprisingly encouraged in his literary endeavors by Carl Van Vechten,5 the author of Nigger Heaven and a great influence in the continuation of homoerotic multiracial literature.6 Because of the novels' engagements with Popular Front aesthetics, as well their slightly queer sensibility in regards to both racial and sexual binaries, Knock on Any Door and The Narrows have been mostly overlooked within traditional versions of African American and Gay literary history. While neither novel provides unambiguous images of the racially and sexually perverse subject, both draw attention to the dangers of contemporary domestic ideologies and their conflations of gender, sexuality and race into knowable and manageable categories.
Abbie Crunch, the female protagonist of The Narrows, opens the novel by preparing herself meticulously for going for groceries -- straightening her gloves and hat before a full length mirror. Abbie's opening monologue also illustrates the symbolic meanings of the street as opposed to her house, Number Six Dumble Street. The street, where most of the novel takes place, runs alongside the River Wye. Abbie reflects, "Fortunately the river hadn't changed," but remains, "a sparkling blue river just at the foot of the street, a beautiful river" (4). She continues,
Abbie's description of Dumble Street introduces the novel's symbolic contrasts between modernity and nature, as well as homelessness and home that dominate The Narrows. "The signs tell the story of the change" from Dumble street as an ethnic White immigrant neighborhood to almost wholly Black. It is not only that the signs, with their neon lights contrasting the natural light of the moon, represent the placelessness of the African American poor within bootstraps narratives about immigration, but the specific signs on Dumble street concretely show the transience of its population. Dumble Street's abundance of "Rooms" and more "Rooms," seems connected to the way that moving to Dumble Street guarantees Petry's characters a life of sordid Police negligence or corruption. Both the changefulness of the neighborhood and its diversion from "nature" can be read as about sexual perversion. But Abbie's thouhgts of the river as providing "the illusion of beauty" points up the emptiness of the facades of normative gender and sexual relationships in The Narrows.
Abbie is particularly offended by one particular sign and place on Dumble Street. She observes that the sign outside "The Last Chance," the bar right across the street from Abbie Crunch's house, is a bright red neon, "a horrible color in the sunlight."
Petry both uses and undermines this distinction. In The Narrows, Dumble Street's residents struggle to possess not only their houses, but each other. Petry makes the two into inseparable processes, pointing out the way that normative sexuality commodifies not only the domestic sphere but the gender and humanity of its characters. Link's literal homelessness comes together with his needing to escape into motion pictures that provide the fantasy of "conquering the world." Petry shows how Black urban displacement and modernism come together with post-war narratives of masculinity in the first conversation between Link and Camilo Williams;
Despite Link's claims that he has grown out of such mass-marketed narratives of masculinity, his actions belie his words. Not only does this scene take place in a car, a key symbol in The Narrows of both Link and Camilo's desire to escape the clutches of respectable, domestic heterosexuality, but Link also clearly views his white passenger as another such conquerable continent. Camilo Williams/Treadway (we only learn her real last name as Link does in the middle of the novel) also uses her car to escape from home and its implied class, racial and gender values. Camilo's gender-bending behavior as a driver, the way she claims to "own the road" like she owns the rest of the Monmouth world, marks her as an unhappily married woman. Later in the novel, Link stumbles out of The Last Chance bar, after refusing to be scared of Bill Hod and announcing that he is in love (thus breaking from the codes of Black masculinity which dominate The Last Chance. Link stands outside the bar laughing, "because once again he felt as though he could conquer the world."
In his discussion of the "modern technology" of the movie theater, through the mutual masturbation scene from Native Son, Roderick Ferguson ties the automobile and the movie theater more directly together as symbols of modernity and the racial and sexual perversions it creates; "Like the automobile, the movie theater helped American youth commit social transgressions."
The terms of power in Link and Camilo's relationship are set up in this initial encounter. They come together in their desire to escape sexuality restrictive homes, but once they look for a stable room to spend the night in, their racial and class power differentials begin to fester. Link can't get over Camilo's importing nice furniture, specifically a bed, into their hotel room. In lingering on the symbols of domestic sexuality (particularly the bed that Camilo buys for the hotel room) as manifestations of Camilo's power over Link, and setting this scene of travel as the couple's first and perhaps only opportunity for communication as equals, Petry ironically points up the effects of Fordist economic organization in terms of race and sexuality. Inside the car, or along a mechanized assembly line, people are interchangeable. But once you try to set up house, codes of race and sexuality reassert themselves. Thus, Petry calls attention to the racial and gendered power relations imbedded in home-making, imbalances which make heterosexuality about ownership in the Treadway mansion and the hotel in New York.
Bedrooms are key sights for the downfall of Nick Romano as well. Nick, the novel's "pretty boy" gangster protagonist, refuses his family's attempts to make his life into an alter-boy becomes respectable husband narrative. Nick's aversion to the normative heterosexual bedroom is forecast early in the novel, in a scene of homosocial sexual discovery. As the group of boys "with curious and excited eyes" sneak into an alleyway to peer into the bedroom window of "Old man Snyder" and "his wife,"
Instead of joining in the growing white ethnic upper-working class domestication (funded by government programs that enabled working class families to buy houses in the suburbs), Nick joins a multiracial, homoerotic gang on West Madison. The streets provide Nick with a version of family not bound to a particular house, but instead a bonding between a homosocial/homoerotic male network whose bonds house and feed Nick in a myriad of locations -- flophouses, the Nickel Plate, Pastime. Their outlaw mentality binds Nick to his friends on the street, alongside mutual obligations (monetary and emotional). They share a life of secrets and hiding from the surveillance of the law and their families. Nick explains, "when he was with the fellows he forgot all about home; he was happy . . . The street pulled you back. It got in your blood."
Nick's marriage leads not only to his wife's death (Emma kills herself lying in their marriage bed), but also to Nick's confession for murdering Riley as his guilt about Emma breaks his emotional resolve to hide the truth from the jury. Motley's portrait of Emma and Nick's wedding predicts the homoerotic attachment to movement and fear of heterosexual enclosure that will undoes both characters. In the wedding ceremony itself, streetcars going by repeatedly interrupt Nick's intent focus on the wedding ring in his pocket, "Behind the heavy drapes a streetcar clanged by on 12th Street and Nick was so scared that he wished he was on it."
The woods release Nick's wife, Emma, from the gender and sexually regulative space of her home. The woods provide a symbolic contrast in the novel for the death and foreclosure of possibilities represented in marital homes. In the woods, Emma and Leo "pulled off all their clothes. With their bodies naked, with their belly buttons like the belly buttons on gingerbread men they went into the water. With the sun on your body, with the warm wind tickling your back and your small, narrow hips it was nice. But you didn't tell Mommy about it" (224). Motley's use of free indirect discourse in this passage (a fitting contrast to the omniscient narrative perspective employed in the scenes of Nick's trial), makes the woods into a space of cross-gender play for not only Emma and Leo, but for readers as well. Throughout Emma's section, Motley connects readers to Emma's story by foregrounding the literariness of her life -- books provide her scripts for heterosexuality. Motley uses this readerly identification to bring us closer to the experience of Emma's tragic transition from tomboy to heterosexual woman. Like the space of the street and bars in Nick's developing masculinity, the woods give Emma a sexual and gender freedom that allows her to live out "perversions" such as incest, even if only imaginatively.
The woods is also where Emma and Nick spend their first, chaste night together, where Nick follows Emma deep into the woods.22
Like Willard Motley in Knock on Any Door, Petry's critique of heteropatriarchy highlights the space of the domestic home as a space of death. Abbie's standards of decorum within her home kill not only her connection to Dumble Street and any gender or sexual ambiguity that represents, but also indirectly kill her husband (The Major). In The Narrows, the editor of the local paper, Peter Bullock, is enslaved to his wife's capitalist-domestic ideology. Motley does not take us behind the scenes of the newspaper reports on Nick's trial, but "the press men" bet on Nick's trial and punishment. Like Bullock, their wealth is intimately tied to the destruction of the protagonist.25 In Romance and Rights: The Politics of Interracial Intimacy, 1945-1954, Alex Lubin explores America's post-war denial of the possibilities for African-Americans to control a private sphere. Rachel Peterson has recently expanded on this point, highlighting Petry's critique of the media as a falsified public sphere that served merely to create another privacy shield for whites who controlled its coverage of their crimes.26 Bullock's paper acts as just such a shield. Furthermore, his decision to publish stories that villify Link in the end comes from his need to pay the mortgage on the "modern" house that is a parody of "Hearth" and "Home," where he burns specially treated wood for "Decorative effect."
The Treadway Butler, Malcolm Powther, also gets caught up in simulating "home," only he makes a home-scene for his employers, Bunny and Camilo Treadway. Powther thinks that his attempts to stage the Treadway marriage as domestic bliss will save him from association with Link and the rest of Dumble Street. Powther sees himself as the savior of not only the aesthetics of the Treadway house, but the Treadway marriage and dynasty in the union of Bunny and Camilo. Powther "reminded himself, as he always did whenever he felt a little low in his mind, that though he was constantly defeated at home, he was a conqueror, a victor at Treadway Hall," and this victory makes up for his wife infidelity by linking him to the equally cuckolded Bunny. Both Powther and Bunny are emasculated because they cannot own their wives, whose sexual excesses or perversions unravel any attempts to keep them at home. No amount of aesthetic work by Powther can introduce real feeling into the Treadway marraige, or his own.
In a technique reminiscent of Motley's portrait of a wedding, Petry forcasts the failures of Camilo and Bunny Treadway's union through a picture taken by Jubine, the novel's "communist" photographer. Jubine's aesthetic is about the street, he gets the best photos because of an uncanny ability to be out in the way when things are happening -- not at home, or working to finance a home. Peter Bullock tries to explain the power of Jubine's photography to his wife,
Jubine's photographs highlight the connections between the disabled man (Cat Jimmie) and the Treadway fortune that pays for such a "perfect down to the last cufflink" wedding, as Bullock explains that Cat Jimmie is a WWI veteran. Throughout the novel, Cat Jimmie has rolled along Dumble street, trying to look up women's skirts. His injury leaves him no other sexual pleasure, distorting his intense masculine sexuality into a kind of predatory voyeurism.
Jubine's photo of Cat Jimmie, "squatting in the folds of the wedding gown," does more than connect his disability to the Treadway fortune. The image reveals the emptying out of sexual desire from the jewels and finery of the wedding gown's whiteness. It is also significant that Cat Jimmie literally chases Camilo into Link's arms, showing how the presence of nonnormative sexuality and even violence cannot be erased by the wedding's finery. In the figure of Cat Jimmie, Petry critiques the perversion of desire caused by war and capitalism, and links this to both the perverse and domestic desires of the relationship between Link and Camilo.
Number Six Dumble street, despite Abbie's meticulous care, is also eventually undone by perversity. Abbie aims to give Link a more normative, "white" life, symbolized by buying him a house on the other side of town: "She had picked out a house for him, a brick house, on the other side of town. The instant she saw the For Sale sign on it, she'd managed to marry Link to a nice girl, and get them moved into the house, all in her mind."
The violence of Abbie's reaction to discovering Link and Camilo in bed is worth quoting extensively because it highlights the meanings she has invested in both her home and her bedroom:
It is hard to tell whether Abbie is more outraged at Link and Camilo's transgressive affair, or by the fact that they have had sex in her house, on her bridal bed sheets. Abbie's attempts to insulate her house (and her marriage) from Dumble Street and the sexual perversion the street signals have failed in Link's choice of a partner, so much so that she does not even recognize her surroundings any more. Abbie wonders "Where am I?"
In the above passage, Petry combines short, powerful sentence fragments within Abbie's memories of the Major and Bill Hod's voice to give the reader the sense that time is moving incredibly slowly yet Abbie's emotions and memories are rushing upon her to rapidly to capture in full sentences. Abbie's thoughts emphasize the breakdown of rationality in the face of all she has attempted to keep separate -- the sexuality of the street and of Bill Hod and her memories of her marriage and her own heterosexuality. Abbie also remembers her husband's dying words "The house...," and feels Link's bringing the "harlot" into the house is a violation of the Captain's memory. Abbie seems powerless is the face of overwhelming misunderstandings about men, and further debilitated by her attempts to make all men into one voice. This passage also highlights how much mental work and emotionally energy Abbie has expended making meanings of safety and respectability out of items of housekeeping like sheets and pillowcases. The repeated phrases of "my house" and "I made" point up Abbie's physical and psychic labor in imagining her domestic space.
Abbie's associations with her house are first broken by Mamie Powther's entrance. The character of Mamie Powther personifies the sexuality that exceeds the space of both the home and the street, private and public spheres. Kimberly Drake, in her exploration of Mamie as a Blues Woman, forcefully argues that Mamie's sexual agency creates a space of life and change within Abbie's home. Drake points to Petry's contrasting the Treadway mansion as "a model of domestic perfection but lacking in life of any kind," and Mamie's kitchen which makes "the house (into) a haven of delicious food and playful affection."
Petry also shows how Mamie also draws out the sexual desires of all the novel's characters, including Abbie's desires the have remained hidden underneath gloves and similar trappings of respectability. Abbie's observations of Mamie washing her clothing in the yard betray this possibility of queer desire,
As Abbie becomes mesmerized by Mamie Powther's movements and near nakedness, Petry shows how Mamie exceeds her domestic space while also exceeding the bounds of heterosexuality.35 The word "too" in this passage points out the almost universal invitation of Mamie's sexuality, even the wind itself is attracted to her. Petry sets this scene in the context of laundering clothes, using the contrast between Abbie and Mamie's housekeeping practices (she is trying to get Link away from the door and thus away from the wiles of Mamie's "washing dance") to highlight connections between aesthetics of home-making and sexuality.
Abbie's homemaking is all about policing the sexual boundaries of the house, represented later in the novel by her reflections that she was trying to find Link a "good girl, (one of) the ones who went to church, the ones who wanted husbands and homes and children."
While Mamie can be thought of as a similar symbolic device to Emma in Knock on Any Door, she also shares with Nick (and with Link) an inability to pretend to be anything other than what she is. This comes out most clearly in her choice of bedroom furniture, which Abbie judges as "appalling," vulgar, and out of place "in Number Six Dumble Street."
By trying to lock Link into a normative sexual future, Abbie only adds to his desire to escape into a narrative of perverse sexuality. But Petry also shows how Link fails to fully cast off the normative gender and racial associations of Abbie's vision -- he still attempts to own and control Camilo and feels emasculated when he can't. Camilo and Link cannot make a home together, not only because of their racial and class difference, but also because they both define their "home" space and their sexual relationship in terms of purchases. In contrast to Motley, whose disavowal of the domestic sphere is routed in a protest of the lost homosocial bonding that was actively discouraged in the postwar period due to the development of a Fordist organization of production and consumption,38 Petry's engagement with the domestic sphere recuperates the space as a place for homosocial attachment and labor. We can most clearly see her protesting given models of Black middle-class domesticity based in consumerism by locating her in conversation with the popular stories of her era. Through this dialogue with popular stories in magazines such as Tan Confessions and Half Century Magazine, we can see Petry's critique of consumption as a sterile form of sexuality, producing only evacuated exteriors of "home" rather than vibrant and welcoming spaces.
In the 1920s, drawing on earlier turn of the century models of ways to address racism, narratives about African American women in urban areas showed all migration routes leading "home." After brief periods of interacting in public, urban entertainment, the heroines of these popular stories settled down to furnishing their homes and families with the latest products and the latest ways to uplift the Negro race through proper mothering. In fact, the middle class aspirations of the family registered more in terms of education and Christian values than material possessions.39 Noliwe Rooks has observed a turn in these narratives coexistant with post-war organization of urban life and labor, "By the 1950s, stories of urban love and marriage took a decidedly different turn . . . the point of getting or staying married was to ensure access to a husband's earnings in order to participate in the culture of consumption."
The fragility of popular domestic narratives is foregrounded in what we have already seen as Petry's emphasis on the ways that Abbie must constantly work to resignify her house as "respectable" and divide it from its setting in Dumble Street. That work of domestic isolation erases any real understanding between her and her husband (the Major), as she does not see the Major's important connections to the neighborhood. Camilo's attempts to "own" the domestic servants in the hotel are paralleled with her attempts to "own" her sexual relationship with Link (if not Link himself) in Petry's description of their hotel room, another transient and tragic domestic space. After Camilo charges him with rape, Link reflects on the ways that their domestic space predicted the racism and sexism that caused their downfall:
In this revision of his earlier thoughts on being "in love with Camilo Williams," Link reflects on how her ownership of their story was historically predicted and materially manifested in her control of their domestic space. Link and Camilo commodify their own story and each other. Motley also shows his male protagonist being exploited by a sexuality that is profoundly linked to the space of the hotel room -- renting perversion for one night -- except Nick's clients are primarily gay men.
As opposed to Owen, Knock on Any Door's most developed homosexual character, Nick meets and sleeps with a progression of "phonies," who supply him with his lifestyle of being "used to having money in (his) pockets all the time" (151). These "respectable businessmen" take Nick to hotels and register him as "son or brother," a move that highlights Motley's critique of empty family rhetoric and ties this critique further to the failures of permanent homelike spaces in the novel. The "phoniness" of these exchanges serves as a forcefull indictment of the sexualization of class exploitation. They can be read alongside the intensely homoerotic moment of Tommy's beating on stage at reform school, described in detail twice in Knock on Any Door, the first time while Nick witnesses the beating:
Tommy's small hands worked clumsily with his belt. The pants fell down to his shoetops, a circle of blue around his ankles. The immature legs were skinny. His small, narrow buttocks were exposed for everyone to see. The hard light beat down. . . Tommy grabbed his ankles. The skin tightened out across his behind. Fuller (the superintendant of the reform school) raised the strape. Nick saw the muscles coil into a knot in that one arm. Goose pimples gathered on the surface of Nick's skin and he sucked his lips back in between his teeth. The whip posed above Tommy's bare buttocks like a snake about to strike.43
Even without Motley's later use of this episode as an intertext for Nick's execution, the scene clearly interpolates all the male students at the reform school within a masochistic relationship between Fuller and Tommy. Nick evinces here an extreme degree of empathy for Tommy, who he wants to emulate, side with, and also save from harm. But he also witnesses Tommy's nakedness as parallel to his own, lost within a corporate world where masculinity means being cut off from or having power over other men, and then using that power to finance a leisure life of heterosexual domesticity.
Tommy's sin in this system of masculinity is his connection to the other boys, including his "Negro" friend Sam. Tommy famously claims "I'll talk to anyone I want," when the other boys tease him for talking to Sam. This interracial male solidarity prefigures their escape from reform school, where the boys band together to distract the guards and all run in different directions at once. In the turning point of his masculine journey, we see Nick rejecting his father's example of power for the homosocial bonding Nick joins in reform school. In drawing his allegiance with Tommy, Nick's physically weak but morally steadfast reform school counterpart, Nick simultaneously breaks with the life of familial obligations and the life of the law, "He'd never be sorry for anything he ever did again. He'd never try to reform now. He was on Tommy's side. All the way. For good. Forever" (60). Nick's perversion and his connection with a multiethnic group of boys at the reform school is the downfall of not just the school but also any chance for Nick's successful heterosexual domestication.
Within the literary conversation of the 1940s, both Motley and Petry participated in a Popular Front aesthetics that promoted a mixing of "high" and "low," or "popular" and "literary" culture.44 Popular Front aesthetics also promoted an anti-racist, ethnic pluralism that at times resembled "sentimental or corny negations of particular ethnic or racial affiliation"
Owen has a connection to the streets -- he lives in the same neighborhood and frequents the same bars as Nick and his gang. But Owen also serves as a safe and secure relationship for Nick in the novel. A neatly made bed dramatizes this safety and security in Owen's apartment night Nick finally leaves home for good, incensed by his father's beatings. Nick is welcome at Owen's for as long as he needs to stay; "his bed was made down on the sofa, fresh sheets, a woolly blanket tucked all the way around, a fold of the blanket thrown back to a soft pillow with a clean slip, its creases still showing" (182). This available bed, especially in contrast to the one in Nick's father's house, where Nick lay being beaten a few pages earlier, is a sign of respect for Nick's needs and desires. Owen closes his bedroom door. While Owen clearly wants sex from Nick, he also wants something else, another kind of connection that Nick describes as "being near him" (189). Being near Owen, while still "outside the law" of normative heterosexuality, is also a space of confession for Nick of his homosocial bonds with Tommy. The violent masculinity of the gang won't tolerate such stories, which would undermine their fantasy of power enabled by their ability to support/buy sex from street women.
In Knock on Any Door, both heterosexuality and homosexuality are for sale. Nick remarks of his homosexual clients, "He played them and threw the money away on girls" (151). Owen's apartment is not only a haven from the demands of heterosexual masculinity and its constant disavowal of the homoerotic undertones of the life of the street, but also a from "trade" homosexuality and its sexualization of unequal class relations. Owen's apartment thus fosters nonnormativity, as the one place in this world where Nick feels safe and secure in his attachments to men. Significantly, Nick's sister also comes to Owen's apartment to confess her interracial sexual relationship, which is disallowed from the marriage and family script just as much as Nick's interracial gangs of men. Owen and Nick's relationship and his sister's failures at normative heterosexuality provide cover for each other's rejection of the Romano family and its sexual/gender/racial values. As Ferguson notes about this period in the history of Chicago as both a city and a center for sociological research, "miscegenation, juvenile delinquency, prostitution and homosexuality constituted a constellation of nonheteronormative functions" (35).
Within the thematic networks of The Narrows, "ChinaCamiloWilliams" is a combination of China, a local brothel owner who is possibly also Link's mother50, and Camilo Williams, the white heiress who Link desires but can never possess because she will always have more money and power than he does.
Link's model for (hetero)sexual relations is all about possession and domination, he thinks of all women as one, rather amorphous and abstract, sexual object named "MamiePowtherChinaCamiloWilliams."
Link's narrative of ownership as sexuality and "home" also has no place in Abbie's relationship to Frances, which is mostly about taking care of each other and each other's houses while they are away (mentally or physically). In contrast to Link's desires, which portray women solely as objects to be consumed and possessed, Petry portrays Frances and Abbie's relationship as an erotic scene of caregiving. Abbie's bed becomes the setting for a kind of radical interdependency that assures both women that they have a home with each other:
Abbie was in bed, flat on her back in the big mahogany four-poster bed, and the lamp by the bed had a tan-colored cloth draped over the shade, so that the light in the room was very dim. F.K. Jackson sat beside the bed, holding Abbie's hand, murmuring to her in a soothing voice.53
Frances' soothing voice seems to say "There, there, there, Yes, yes, yes, I know, I know, I know, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here."
Mamie's character seems the most vocally present in the novel. Mamie is always singing or humming as she goes about her housework. Blues women have a long tradition of representing African American, female sexuality in subversive terms through the spaces they opened up as performers. Recent scholarly attention has turned to other ways that Black women signified their sexuality, focusing on aesthetic labor and domestic spaces. In a recently published dissertation, Afei lakjsflkjasfd has argued that Black female authors of the 1940s use a multiplicity of low and high cultural aesthetics to carve out "a space outside of the sexual in which they feel erotically empowered despite their intersecting racial, class and gendered inequities."
As I mentioned previously, Petry's creation of Bullock, the newspaper editor who villifies Link in order to keep support from Treadway advertisements and thus afford his luxurious modern house, unites her critique of popular cultural stories about black masculinity with the vision of uplifting the race that would deny connections to such black men as Link in favor of domestication and class respectability. In the scene where Bullock is weighing his options about printing stories about Link and losing the Treadway business, Petry pauses for a reflection on his wife's role in Link's downfall:
Bullock's "No" seals Link's fate in the public opinion, and also ties Petry to Childress' efforts to unionize domestic workers in Harlem (most of whom were poor, black women). The Narrows does paint a rather starkly class divided Black community, but in the end Abbie's willingness to look after Mamie's children and share in the house's domestic labor makes her a part of Dumble Street despite her protestations otherwise.
The ending of The Narrows also indicates that this lesbian subtext to Frances and Abbie's relationship only works because they keep separate homes. Petry emphasizes the ritual of the women kissing each other while saying "come in, come in" in their foyers (233). When Francis invites Abbie to move in with her, Abbie realizes that becoming dependent on Francis (and her housekeeper, Miss Dorrit), would turn her "into a doddering old woman." She replies, "Thank you very much. But I'm not that old, or that feeble. I'll be all right. If the time ever comes when I feel I can no longer live here alone, why I'll let you know."
While Motley's alternative homosocial and homosexual environment takes place along West Madison and Taylor Street, The Narrows reclaims housework as a space of connection between women. Motley's realist narrative techniques turn domestic space into a foreboding realm of enforced heteropatriarchy, while Petry's realism lingers over the details of domestic spaces in order to reveal them as empty facades. Set against the sexual and gender permissive spaces either outside home or between homes, both these novels reveal the violence of state efforts to police race through sexual surveillance. Petry and Motley also both critique common understandings of racial uplift as normative heterosexuality, showing how such visions of heterosexuality only shove the "undomesticated" sexual other into the mercy of state and police sponsored reform movements. In both novels, beds matter because of how they are made (or not made), who gets to sleep in them (or not), and what the experience of the bedroom is for its occupants.  Owen and Nick, as well as F.K. Jackson and Abbie make nonnormative relations of intimacy into spaces of mutual support and gender experimentation.
