Karl Marx famously wrote, "Men make their own history, but they do not make it jut as they please; they do not make it under circumstances chosen by themselves, but under circumstances directly encountered, given and transmitted from the past."
In this essay I am particularly concerned with Part Three of Foucault's Discipline and Punish, "Discipline." The three chapters in this section examine the historical development of what Foucault calls "the disciplines" -- the cultural norms and ideas that have come to govern many aspects of our everyday lives, such as individuality, personal discipline, segmented time and space, etc. "Docile Bodies" explores how this process began as a mapping of social control directly onto the individual body. Foucault writes, "The human body was entering a machinery of power that explores it, breaks it down and rearranges it;" the disciplines "were always meticulous, often minute, techniques . . . they defined a certain mode of detailed political investment of the body, a 'new micro-physics' of power."
While Foucault never states explicitly that capitalism is the primary historical force driving the development of the disciplines, the importance of these disciplines to the development of modern industrial capitalism is apparent. The "mechanics of power" that produced "docile bodies"
The various forms of the time-table are more obviously useful to capitalism through the principle of exhaustive use, as "wasting" time became forbidden: "the time-table was to eliminate the danger of wasting it -- a moral offence and economic dishonesty."
Once people had figured out how to use the disciplines to produce docile bodies that could be controlled and manipulated, a means of training future generations was necessary to ensure the continued functioning of the disciplines in the service of the powerful (who were increasingly capitalists). Thus, training (whether in the form of education or initiation into the workplace) was increasingly routinized and discipline was kept through mechanisms of surveillance, or more generally, "means of general visibility."
Eventually the search for the perfect means of both training and surveillance were resolved in the invention of the Panopticon, an architectural form designed explicitly to instill personal discipline in supposed social deviants through the fear of constantly being watched. In the Panopticon, every inmate would be separated from every other inmate by cell walls. These cells were arranged in circular fashion around an interior courtyard, at the center of which was an observation tower. The trick to the Panopticon, however, was that the watchtower was designed so that inmates never knew whether or not they were being watched at a particular moment. The fear of being watched (and the resulting punishment, should they misbehave), however, would theoretically keep them in line at all times. The ability of the Panopticon to work was predicated upon a concept of individuality (I may be watched, therefore I may be punished) at the same time that it instilled values of personal discipline into its inmates. Thus, while originally developed as a design for prisons, panoptic design elements were quickly incorporated into other public places such as schools, factories and hospitals, as well, so that all members of society may be trained to be docile bodies.
Throughout this analysis capitalism is a driving force for the implementation and growth of the disciplines. Foucault asserts that the development of the disciplines corresponds to the historical conjuncture of the "large demographic thrust of the eighteenth century" and "the growth in the apparatus of production, which was becoming more and more extended and complex; it was also becoming more costly and its profitability had to be increased."
While William Cronon's examination of the relationship between Chicago and its "hinterland," and thus between urban and rural contexts, in the development of the interior of the continental United States is less theoretical and more historically specific than Foucault's work, nevertheless here too capitalism seems to stand in as the historical agent responsible for driving change in a particular trajectory. A brief review of Cronon's narrative will suffice four my purposes. Despite the fact that Chicago was one of a number of "least bad" places for a commercial metropolis to develop that would link the Eastern states with the developing American hinterland, it somehow came out on top of all the others (for at least a little while). The primary reason for this was a rather felicitous location as a midpoint between the East Coast and the American "frontier" during the second half of the 19th century, precisely the time when railroads were expanding across the continent. Thus, Chicago was successful in attracting all of the major railroad lines in either direction. At the same time, railroad shipping was revolutionizing commercial activity in the U.S., as products such as wheat, lumber and meat were able to be marketed farther and farther away from their point of production. The capitalist imperative of maximization of surplus merely cemented the importance of the railroads in the commercial life of the U.S. Since (nearly) all major railroads ran through Chicago, it "naturally" became the commercial capital of the American mid-continent as it tied together various isolated communities in the West and connected them all to the wider world of the East.
In the analyses of both Foucault and Cronon, individuals rarely appear as agents. Rather, people act in ways that are consonant with capitalist imperatives of growth, expansion and maximization. Whether this was their intention or not, both Cronon and Foucault portray capitalism as an impersonal historical force that sweeps people up in its path; even if it is possible for individuals to resist it, so few actually manage to do so that the progress of the capitalist world system can continue unabated even in the face of such resistance (as evidenced by Cronon's small-town butchers and their futile resistance to the expansion of frozen, packed meats). Such a conception of capitalism, however, is ahistorical: although the developmental process of the capitalist world system is described in detail, no attention is given to the original development of capitalism as an entity, economic system or worldview. Was it, in its first instance, just as impersonal as it has come to be, the accidental (or fortuitous) result of a specific historical conjunction, or were there human actors instrumental in developing and implementing it? Foucault's subtitle, "The Birth of the Prison," suggests that one of the purposes of his project is to elucidate the origins of the modern penal system -- presumably so that we may reform it and do away with its inhumane aspects. Similarly, if we are to understand modern capitalism for the purposes of reforming its negative impacts on people's lives (a project with which I believe both Foucault and Cronon would agree), we must understand its origins. Only by piercing the ideology of the timelessness and inevitability of the capitalism system will we be able to escape Marx's somewhat pessimistic evaluation of human agency at a time when such an escape is more urgent than ever.
