Part of the task of feminist scholarship is to uncover patriarchal ideologies embedded in social discourse. For feminist historiography, a dilemma arises when this task entails the critique of a leader popularly celebrated as a champion of an oppressed group. This dilemma mires a gendered reading of Bhimrao Ramji Ambedkar's social and political thought. B.R. Ambedkar, born an untouchable from the Mahar caste, dedicated his life to the political and social struggle against untouchability and caste. Today, he is one of the few nationalist leaders who is esteemed by both men and women, feminist and anti-caste activists. As a defender and advocate of Dalits, a community found in villages, towns and cities across India, Ambedkar is one of the few nationalist leaders who has, as Ramchandra Guha writes, "truly pan-Indian appeal."1 While the feminist historian must contend with both the Dalit popular imagining of Ambedkar, an imagining that can potentially empower both men and women towards the practice of equality, and the continued marginalization of Dalits in India, he or she also faces an intellectual responsibility to assess Ambedkar's thoughts on women and gender relations through his own words. Such an engagement with Ambedkar's writings and speeches reveals his ambivalence towards Dalit women and his espousing of patriarchal gender relations similar to the dominant socio-religious reformist model. While Ambedkar does denounce the most apparent and infamous patriarchal practices of his time, namely sati, child marriage and enforced widowhood, his critique of patriarchy is restricted to upper caste customs and emerges only when it supports his critique of Brahmanism and caste.
In this essay, I will offer an analysis of the representations of gender relations in the writings and speeches of B.R. Ambedkar. The sources I interpret, from an anthropology seminar paper presented at Columbia University in 1916 to the formulation of oaths for conversion to Buddhism in 1956, span a period of forty years.2 Despite the inconsistencies in thought that emerge given the time span of these writings, my analysis will suggest that Ambedkar's critique of patriarchy is both limited and strategic and that his prescriptions for Dalit women remain within the paradigm of nationalist-reformist ideals of respectability. I will highlight the tension between Ambedkar's critique of social hierarchy and his vision of a strong and respectable Dalit community as a political force, a vision that seemed to necessitate the marginalization of Dalit women. With the end of colonialism and the promulgation of the Indian Constitution, however, a subtle, but meaningful, change in thought about gender relations can be discerned in Ambedker's writings. I will suggest that this change may be linked to the establishment of democracy and a legal and political framework that reflected Ambedkar's commitment to the universalist ideals of equality and liberty. Ambedkar's discussions of gender relations after 1950, I argue, can be categorized as feminist in that they represent the ideals of a particular kind of political modernity, one rooted in respect for the individual as social agent and equality before the law.
Since the publication of his first biography, Dhananjay Kheer's Dr. Ambedkar: Life and Mission, in 1954, Ambedkar's life and thought has been a focus of study for historians, political scientists, scholars of religion and others; researchers, however, have only recently begun to analyze Ambedker's ideas on gender.3 Nearly all accounts of Ambedkar's work begin by recounting his early experiences of caste-based discrimination. Ahir narrates the humiliating experiences Ambedkar endured from his early days in primary school, where he was forced to sit outside the classroom and denied water, to his days working as a lawyer, harassed by his colleagues and also prohibited from drinking common water.4 Ambedkar's time abroad in New York and London is also described as a crucial experience that imparted a critical perspective on conditions in India. As Ambedker himself recalls, "my five years of study in Europe and America had completely wiped out of my mind any consciousness that I was an untouchable and that an untouchable wherever he went in India was a problem to himself and others."
Gail Omvedt and Eleanor Zelliot have provided remarkable historical studies of the nineteenth century non-Brahman movements that influenced Ambedkar's anti-caste and social reform work.7 These works demonstrate how the critique of Brahmanism formulated by Jotirao Phule and the Satyashodak Samaj provided an influential template for struggles against caste. Phule, along with his contemporaries and associate Tarabai Shinde, put forth powerful critiques of Brahmanism as patriarchy and advocated for the welfare of all women, upper and lower caste women. Interestingly, while Ambedkar's understanding of the intersection of caste and gender inequality seems to be influenced by Phule, several aspects of Ambedkar's ideas on women are less radical and contain patriarchal elements that Phule himself challenged during his life.8
Most studies of Ambedkar focus on his efforts to abolish untouchability and caste and his political work in both colonial and post-colonial India.8 The Mahad Stayagraha in 1927, understood by Omvedt as "the foundation for the liberation struggle of Mahrastrian Dalits," was a movement for access to public space and resources; the demonstration transformed into a "cultural challenge" when protesters burned the Manusmriti.10 From 1930-1935, Ambedkar organized the Nasik Satyagraha to gain entry to the Kalaram temple, a movement that included many female activists. Ambedkar also worked to abolish the traditional responsibilities of the Mahar caste and organized a march of 25,000 Kunbi and Mahar peasant tenants against their Brahmin landlords in 1938. In her evaluation of these movements, Gail Omvedt argues that Ambedkar targeted issues of civil rights and thus diverged from the "focus on personal virtue," such as hygiene and vegetarianism, in Gandhi's Harijan Sevak Sangh.11 I will argue, however, that a "focus on personal virtue," can be also be discerned in Ambedkar's prescriptions for Dalit women. While Ambedkar advocated for their participation in politics and public demonstrations, he is equally concerned with their habits, dress, and appearance.
Ambedkar held the first Depressed Class Conference in 1920. His emergence into politics followed his successful mobilization of a group of educated Mahar men and upper caste reformers. In 1926 he was nominated to the Legislative Council, where he first sponsored a bill for access to the water tank in Mahad. He also supported a bill for maternity leave for women, arguing that its expense should come from both the government and private employers. Discussions of Ambedkar's political efforts focus on his advocacy of separate electorates for the Depressed Classes and consequent dispute with Gandhi. The development of the Depressed Classes into a formidable political force was key to Ambedkar's vision of their advancement; the Poona Pact, which overturned the Communal Award and replaced separate electorates with reserved seats in the general electorate after Gandhi fasted in protest, was a disappointment and resulted in a lasting distrust for Gandhi. The clash with Gandhi has, in part, Jeffrelot argues, given Ambedkar a reputation of siding with the Britsh and thus being anti-nation.12 Ramchandra Guha departs from most studies of Gandhi and Ambedkar and tries to "see their contributions as complimentary" arguing that boh Gandhi and Ambedkar can be considered heroes for the history of the nation and the emancipation of the dalits.13 My reading of the dispute between Gandhi and Ambedkar will focus on a series of letters exchanged during the Communal Award negotiations and the ways in which Ambedkar challenged the patriarchal foundations of Gandhi's authority.
In 1936, after the obstacles encountered during the Nasik Satyagraha and the disappointments of the Poona Pact, Ambedkar announced that he "would not die a Hindu." Confrontations with caste Hindus and the ideology of Brahmanism led him to the realization that Hinduism itself had to be abandoned in order to both restore dignity and rights to the Untouchables and to forge nationalist solidarity. As Valarian Rodriguez writes, "one of Ambedkar's most important arguments against Hinduism was that caste and untouchability did not let Hindus act as a community."
Scholars have also discerned a feminist concern with equality in Ambedkar's work on the Constitution and Hindu Code Bill.17 Anu Rao argues that in addition to Ambedkar's challenge to caste within the realm of culture, "the political language of rights and representation that had come to dominate dalit struggles at this point rendered the language of law and constitutionalism an important site for advocating changes within the structures of caste and gender."
While historians and political scientists of India have analyzed Ambedkar's ideas of caste, the "founding figures" of Indian anthropology, as Jeffrelot notes, such as M.N. Srinivas and Louis Dumont have largely neglected Ambedkar's understandings of the origin, regulation and maintenance of caste. Ambedkar's analysis of the practice and ideology of caste emerges in various sources, including his histories of India. His histories, as Omvedt notes, demonstrate that caste has a history, a social origin, and thus also can have an end; they impart the critical idea "that the action of the oppressed and exploited could be effective in" accomplishing this end." As Rodriguez writes, Ambedkar employed the "resources that history and culture offered for an emancipatory project but argues that they became effective only through the matrix of the present."
Ambedkar's histories and conversion to Buddhism also provide a vision of Indian identity that is not premised on Hinduism. Several scholars argue that this formulation makes Ambedkar especially relevant for Indians today.21 Omvedlt also notes how Ambedkar influence can be discerned in the work of African Americans, the Burukumin, Japan's ex-untouchables, and Buddhists throughout Asia. 22 Ambedkar's legacy, however, seems to hold most practical relevance and symbolic power for dalits in India. As Omvedlt argues, Ambedkar has imparted to dalits today "the sense of having been exploited and oppressed builders of the great Indian civilizations and of emerging out of centuries of darkness to claim their heritage."
While anthropological and historical work has examined the intersection of caste and gender social systems, these works seem to only focus on the constraints of caste regulation on upper caste women and neglect the conditions facing lower caste women.25 M.N. Srinivas suggests that the cultures of the lower castes embodied a matriarchal principle that afforded women more liberty and only with processes of "sanskritization," did lower caste women become victim to patriarchal oppression. 26 Scholarship on the non-Brahman movement in Maharastra, most notably by Rosalind O'Hanlon, Uma Chakravarti and Gail Omvedt, has discussed the incorporation of gender and caste critiques into Jotirao Phule, Tarabai Shinde and Pandita Ramabai's writings and work; but these accounts also center around the plight of the upper caste woman.27 Andre Beteille, in a comparison of race and caste through gender, demonstrates that both systems of race and caste are marked by sexual violence towards women on the lowest echelons of the hierarchy by men on the highest and a preoccupation with the purity of women on the highest strata.28 Recent scholarship, such as the essays in Caste and Gender, has continued to challenge the analytic separation of caste and gender inequality. These critiques contest both feminist and anti-caste social understandings for marginalizing Dalit women and have mounted a powerful critique of mainstream Indian feminism. Rao, Pardeshi, Moon and Pawar, and Zelliot suggest that Ambedkar's encouragement of Dalit women's political participation and advocacy for women's legal rights constitute his critique and challenge to patriarchical ideologies and practices.29 Gabrielle Dietrich, however, argues that "unfortunately, Ambedkar, though aware of women's position in general, has not integrated his analysis of caste with an analysis of patriarchy. He confines himself to general observation."
Ambedkar's challenge to patriarchal relations is limited to those social relations that either hinder the development of an autonomous Dalit political community or reinforce his critique of caste and untouchability. Patriarchy should not be conceived of as only control over women but should also encompass a wide range of relations between men that emerge around the authority of men older men.31 Patriarchal privilege underlies not only the marginalization of women by men, but also the authority that older men command over younger men.
Ambedkar confronts and challenges patriarchal norms in his discussions with Gandhi and specifically, in his attempt to wrestle the authority to represent the Depressed Classes from Gandhi. In a speech at the Minorities Committee on November 13, 1931, Gandhi, after reasoning that separate electorates for the Depressed Classes was the most "unkindest cut of all," argues that if there were an election, he rather than Ambedkar, would receive the majority of Depressed Class votes.32 Gandhi at this time has already been given the appellation "Bapu" and his repeated references to the "child-like faith" of the masses of India in him further identify as him a father figure. "I claim myself, in my own person," he asserts, "to represent the vast majority of Untouchables." He dismisses Ambedkar's role of spokesperson of the Depressed Classes, representing him as someone whose "bitter experiences" has distorted his judgment and reason; "it is not a proper claim," Gandhi states, "which is registered by Dr. Ambedkar when he seeks to speak to for the whole of the Untouchables of India."
In speeches countering Ambedkar's claims and in letters to Ambedkar, Gandhi repeatedly highlights his years of experience contemplating and working on Dalit issues. In one letter to Ambedkar, Gandhi writes, "I understand that you have got some grievances against me and the Congress. I may tell you that I have been thinking over the problem of Untouchables ever since my school days -- when you were not even born."
Gandhi later argues that Ambedkar's plan for achieving equality for Untouchables "arrest[s] the marvelous work of the Hindu reformers."
Ambedkar's critique of the patriarchy extends beyond the arena of elite male politics and can also be found in his analysis of sati, child marriage and enforced widowhood, three of the most fervently debated social practices in the nineteenth century. These practices, however, were largely confined to the upper-caste. Ambedkar's critique of patriarchy thus relates primarily to upper caste women and neglects the situation of lower caste women. In Ambedkar's analysis, all three practices function to maintain the caste system. Caste is perpetuated through preservation of endogamy and is thus dependent on the regulation of female sexuality and the female population. It requires, as Ambedkar writes, "equality in numbers of men and women"; "surplus" men or women "become a problem because they can marry out and thus threaten the caste."
In Ambedkar's analysis, the relationship of gender inequality to caste is functional; gender inequality is not analyzed on its own and is subsumed by the system of caste. Caste necessitates the regulation of women and the patriarchal practices he discusses; sati, enforced widowhood and child marriage are the "means" of caste regulation. Ambedkar notes that a wide range of "ideals" centering on a wife's devotion to her husband were created to rationalize these customs. As he writes, "the very fact that these customs were so highly eulogized proves that they needed eulogy for their prevalence"; the ideology of pativrata enables practices which "must have been so abominable and shocking to the moral sense of the unsophisticated that they needed a great deal of sweetening."
Ambedkar's critique of these patriarchal customs and ideologies seems largely strategic: by linking caste with the practices that were associated in both the colonial and reformist imagination with the backwardness of Indian civilization, Ambedkar is able to identify caste as the historical point of origin of India's decay and the most significant obstacle to social reform and India's advancement. As Gabrielle Dietrich argues, "while he [Ambedkar] sees a connection between social evils like sati, child marriage, ban on widow remarriage, caste and untouchability, his occupation is clearly with untouchability and caste."
Through his analysis of sati, child marriage and enforced widowhood, Ambedkar is also able to mount a critique of social reform movements in India. In the Annihilation of Caste, Ambedkar distinguishes between social reform that "in the sense of the reform of the Hindu Family and social reform in the sense of the reorganization and reconstruction of the Hindu Society."
Ambedkar, as Sharmila Rage notes, identifies "caste ideology" as the "very basis of the regulation and organization of women's sexuality."
Ambedkar's contestation of patriarchal ideologies and practices is thus largely limited to those that affect lower caste men and upper caste women. His analysis of the intersection between caste and gender inequality does not fully extend to the situation of dalit women. While Ambedkar organized conferences for depressed class women and encouraged their literacy and political participation, a patriarchal and paternalistic approach to gender reform pervades his discussion of Dalit women.51 Furthermore, Ambedkar's writings suggest that the assertions and empowerment of Dalit women could potentially threaten the wellbeing and strength of the Dalit community as a socially and politically formidable force.
A connection between the empowerment of women and emasculation of men emerges in not only Ambedkar's thoughts on Dalit women, but also in his critique of Hinduism. In his discussion of Hindu goddesses, he argues that whereas Vedic Goddesses "were worshipped only because they were the wives of Gods," Puranic Goddesses are worshipped "in their own right" because they "went to the battlefield and performed great heroic deeds."
This idea is echoed in his assessment of the educational needs of the Dalit community. In a speech delivered in 1956, Ambedkar recalls that after noticing the large sum of money the colonial government invested in Hindu and Muslim education at Benaras Hindu University and Aligarh University, he asked the Viceroy to support education for the Depressed Classes. "The Europeans," he recollects, "were very sympathetic. They accepted my proposal. The problem was on which item the money should be spent."
Ambedkar also suggests that women's role in fashioning a politically and socially formidable Dalit community comes through their performance of dominant codes of respectability. In speeches to or about dalit women during the colonial period, Ambedkar espouses the language of community rather than the individual. He remains vigilant against women subverting his vision of dalit empowerment and instructs women to assume middle class norms of domesticity and respectability. In Ambedkar's discussions, the behavior of women and gender relations within the dalit community index the community as a whole. He is thus attentive to their activities and reputation and while he endorses certain modes of reform, he also marginalizes and ostracizes sectors of the dalit community, namely, the Mahar prostitutes in Bombay.
For example, while Ambedkar opposes the mimicking of upper-caste customs such as enforced widowhood, he instructs Dalit women to dress like upper-caste women. Ambedkar views the silver jewelry and short saris commonly adorned by Mahar women as marks of their subjugation and advises them to appear like upper-caste women. While Pratima Pardeshi argues that this does not convey Ambedkar's endorsement for the "brahmanisation of dalit women," but rather indicates that "Dr. Ambedkar saw the question of the dalit woman's identity of self-respect as crucial to social reform and to the revolutionary struggle."
Ambedkar marginalized Dalit women whose activities contradicted his vision of a self-respecting and respectable community. For example, he found the work of Mahar prostitutes in Bombay so shameful that he refused to integrate them into his movement. Ambedkar's rejection of Mahar prostitutes reveals his privileging of honor above rights. In a meeting in 1936, Ambedkar demands that the prostitutes abandon their "disgraceful life."
In his speech to the Mahar prostitutes, Ambedkar directs them to "marry and settle down to normal domestic life as women of other classes do."
Ambedkar seems to espouse the model of domesticity and respectability associated with the "new woman." The "new woman," the model of proper femininity, formulated through late nineteenth-century nationalist and social reform movements, was educated, financially prudent, modest, and hygienic; she indexed both the respectability and modernity of the community. 63 Influenced by Victorian gender ideals, the companionate model of marital relations, one in which the wife is both the partner and helpmate of her husband, provided the paradigm for relations within marriage for the new woman. The "new woman," as Partha Chatterjee writes, "was subjected to a new patriarchy"
The new woman is identified not only through her difference from the Westernized woman, as Chatterjee argues, but also from the lower class and caste. As Tharu and Lalita discuss, "increasingly over the nineteenth century, the respectability of women from the emerging middle classes was being defined in counterpoint to the 'crude and licentious' behavior of lower class women."
Ambedkar's discussions of gender after independence signal a shift from a focus on respectability to one on rights. While his earlier discussions contain instrumental critiques of upper-caste patriarchy and paternalistic directives for the domestic reform of Dalit women lives, Ambedkar's work on the Constitution of India and the Hindu Code Bill impars a commitment to women's legal and political equality as citizens of India. He rewrites prevailing laws to reflect his respect for the individual and his commitment to equality and liberty. In this way, as Pratima Pardeshi writes, Ambedkar undoes Manu's "caste-based and patriarchal law" and provides India with a new template for social relations, one based on "fraternity," which, Ambedkar argues, "is only another name for democracy."
Ambedkar's frustrations with the secular state in enacting equality grew with the difficulty of getting the Hindu Code Bill passed. After years of championing the bill and participating in its debate, Ambedkar resigned from Nehru's Cabinet on September 25, 1951, noting that he only stayed on in Nehru's government despite his differences in the hope that he could get the bill passed. Ambedkar argued that the bill was intended to give "the widow, the daughter, the widow of the pre-deceased son...the same rank as the son in the matter of inheritance. In addition to that, the daughter also is given a share of her father's property; her share is prescribed as half of that of her son."
The Hindu Code Bill, Ambedkar notes in his resignation letter, "was the greatest social reform measure ever undertaken by the Legislature of this country"; Nehru "although sincere, had not the earnestness and determination required to get the Hindu Code Bill through."
Disenchanted with the focus and efficacy of the secular state, Ambedkar turns to Buddhism to create a community and ethics to undo the principle of hierarchy in Indian society. Conversion to Buddhism is an explicit critique of the inequality and segmentation that characterizes Hindu society and provides, as Omvedt argues, the opportunity to "redefine and reconstitute...relations with the whole of Indian society, with its various groups, its historical and cultural traditions."
The alternative Ambedkar puts forth is one already embedded in his histories of ancient India. The age of Buddhism, the golden age of Indian civilization in Ambedkar's narrative, provides the historical antecedent for the repudiation of Hindu beliefs and the social relations they structure. Ambedkar, like other reformers, employs "trope of decline" and the level of advancement of each period in history is indexed by the status of women. 78 However, while Ambedkar's histories remain within the nationalist and reformist genre in terms of structure, his narrative impart very different representations of the past and consequently, aspirations for the future.
Uma Chakravarti discusses the prominence of idealizations of a supposed Aryan Age as the golden age of India in the reformist and nationalist imagination; this golden age is indexed by the figure of the "the Aryan woman," who "came to occupy the center of the stage in the recounting of 'the wonder that was India' representing an amalgamation of Brahmanical and Kshatryia values."
The Buddha's social revolution, however, not only denounced the caste system and bars on intermarriage and interdining, but also liberated women and advanced their status in society. Buddhism gave women "the right to knowledge and the right to realize their spiritual potentialities along with man."
The third phase in Ambedkar's history of India begins with the revolution of Pushyamitri; Buddhism is overthrown and Brahmanism, a counter-revolution, is established. Manu provides the legal institutionalization of Brahmanism and not only is caste, in its most severe forms legitimated, but practices like endogamy, sati, child marriage and enforced widowhood are enacted to regulate caste. Manu, Ambedkar argues, is responsible for the downfall of the Indian woman. He "wanted to deprive women of the freedom they had under the Buddhistic regime."
Ambedkar's movement for conversion to Buddhism thus signifies an appeal to return to the social relations that marked the Buddhistic regime in India. Buddhism provides an ethical framework, that along with the legal guarantees of the Constitution, that could transform Indian society. Conversion allows women to forsake the patriarchy of both Hinduism and the Indian secular state and enter a more egalitarian social system It is the Buddhist woman, a model of an educated, empowered and independent woman, not the Aryan woman, who embodies the Ambedkar's aspirations, for future social relations.
Ambedkar concludes his discussion on the status of women in the different periods of Indian history by suggesting that critiquing figures of the past who prescribed roles for women based on the needs of their times is not the most productive project for the empowerment of men and women. Perhaps a gendered reading of Ambedkar's writings and speeches is open to this accusation. Ambedkar's social and political thought remains a testament to his ideological independence and to his commitment to the empowerment of all individuals. His radical critiques of both the principle of hierarchy and majoritarianism maintain their salience today. Many of his views on women and gender relations do stand in contradiction with the body of his work. While this reveals a blindness to women's subjectivities and the structural and material constraints affecting their lives, it also points to the predicament of a colonized and minority group attempting to forge a formidable social and political community. Not only was Ambedkar constrained by the politics of the colonial state and the play of "communities" for power, he was also not impervious to the prevailing discourses on gender that linked particular modes of respectability with modernity. Ambedkar also had to contend with the denigration of the dalit community by the majority of other Indians; his conflicting and at points, patriarchal views on gender indicate the difficulty of maintaining a truly feminist politics in a context in which the men of a community are rendered socially and politically impotent. Ambedkar compromised challenges to the structural inequalities facing women in order to inculcate proper norms of domesticity and respectability in the dalit community. He also, however, had to confront the burden of untouchability, a notion premised on the logic of defilement and the psychology of aversion; this too can be seen to have exerted additional pressures that shaped his views on the significance of women's codes of behavior to the empowerment of the community.
Today Ambedkar remains a hero for dalits, both men and women. Despite the contradictions in his ideas on women and gender, it could be argued that the very idea of Ambedkar functions to deliver a message of the universal right to social and political equality. For this, it seems that feminists as well pay tribute to Ambedkar as a champion of gender equality. He himself, however, argues that a possible means of empowerment would be to "strive to emulate those great souls among Indian women whose names have survived many a mighty empire, whose thoughts were higher than statecraft and whose hearts greater than the power of monarchs"" such as Savitri, Maitreyi, Gargi, Mirabai and Padmini 86 Ambedkar thus not only provides for the contingency of his own statements on gender relations but also enables various models of women's lives to serve as templates for an ethical and empowered mode of social life.
