Between 1870 and 1920, American cities "flourished as never before." Not only did urban population grow exponentially in this period, but per capita income and free time expanded as well, making cities into places of leisure and tourism as well as industry and labor.5 Urban rail terminals were closely associated with this trend. George Douglas claims that "Americans came to think of the railroad as the tool of these great urban centers. The railroads had made these cities possible."
The extent to which these motivations mattered in Detroit is seen through a collection of letters written between 1911 and 1915 by Henry B. Ledyard, Vice President of the Detroit River Tunnel Company -- a subsidiary of the Michigan Central Railroad Company charged with building the new station. The project required years of daily communication between Ledyard and architects, contractors and other executives. The volume of this correspondence speaks to the scale of the project -- a massive urban terminal meant to accommodate every active railroad in Detroit.
George Douglas contends that the primary function of such great urban stations was "human adaptation and amusement."
Ledyard pushed architect Charles Reed to include a drug store and a "tea room for women" to make the station more attractive. In a 1916 guide to the construction and maintenance of rail stations, John Droege praised the "modern idea" of a men's dressing room at Michigan Central.12 Company executives did have modern changes in mind when dressing rooms were included in the plans "to permit people traveling from suburban trains...to change their clothing."
In addition to offering modern amenities, railroad corporations used architecture to display their wealth and success. Richards and Mackenzie claim that American stations were "overbuilt" in the early twentieth century, with a lavishness that "far exceeded strictly functional requirements."
Ledyard had a vision of corporate growth in mind throughout his letters. He referred to the construction project as the "new station and office building," viewing MCRC's office space as significant as the station itself. Architects planned and executed a fifteen story office building set behind the passenger terminal, though Ledyard predicted that the company would not need more than nine or ten stories "for many years to come."
Though the office tower was never fully utilized, even at the height of the station's operations,19 Ledyard wrote to Reed predicting that at least 250,000 square feet would be necessary "to take care of the general offices of this company for many years to come." In his response, Reed apparently wanted to reduce this square footage and Ledyard agreed -- so the office tower would have been even bigger if following the executive's vision. Still, Ledyard's use of "for many years to come," here and repeated throughout his letters expresses the company's optimism surrounding the new station. Evident in this is the implicit belief that railroads would continue to prosper, dominating industry and commerce and necessitating ample office space for the Michigan Central corporation. Beyond confidence in the railroad itself, the planners of MCS demonstrated a faith in the settled workings of society in a larger sense. Ledyard's strong advocacy for the inclusion of a separate waiting room for women, for example, indicated his willingness to enforce established gender divisions. So too did the men's smoking and reading rooms: "Women were not, apparently, expected to read," at Michigan Central.20
Despite their apparent trust in the status quo, Michigan Central executives did allow for the potential of limited change. Ledyard proposed adding a garage for automobiles because he believed that, "in proportion to the population, there are more automobiles in Detroit than any other city."
In the station's later years, parking proved a particularly problematic issue because of Michigan Central's position over a mile away from central Detroit. Ledyard admitted that the location "being so much further from the center of the city as is the present station has raised a good many questions." Still, the executive seemed confident that the problems of location would solve themselves after "the station has been in operation for some little time."
Like many Detroiters in 1913, Michigan Central's planners believed that the city's central business district would expand and ultimately encompass the new station.28 Though aware that the station's surroundings were "not very attractive, and will not probably be for some time to come," Ledyard trusted that the station would attract business -- "saloons," to the land surrounding it. He perhaps had in mind the historic tendency of railroads to build into uninhabited areas, "creating civilization from nothing -- " as Douglas explains, the city of Chicago was no more than a muddy village before rail lines plowed through it in the early nineteenth century. However, unlike past successes, Michigan Central Station did not pull city life to it, but remained an "island of isolation" up to the present day.30
