People learn and adapt to their culture's norms of gender and sexuality throughout their lives and in a variety of ways, but particularly during childhood and adolescence. Institutionalized sex education, though only one of many forums for childhood learning of such norms, is important to the transmission of dominant discourses of gender and sexuality. Given the importance of gender and sexuality to both social order and personal subjectivity, sex education can be of particular importance when shaping or reshaping them is seen as important to dealing with the past or the future. Thus, it should hardly be surprising that sex education in East and West Germany would differ, reflecting their divergent ways of dealing with their past of Nazism and the destruction of war, and of (re)constructing a more legitimate German state and society in opposition not only to the Third Reich but also to each other. The West, on the one hand, remembered the sexually liberal aspects of Nazism, linking that causally with their genocides, and embarked upon a project of "normalization" of gender relations after the "hour of the woman" and the demasculinzation caused by death, absence, or incapacity of so many German men.5 The East, however, facing a much more serious "surplus of women," focused on the creation of a socialist society ostensibly including gender equality. By the 1970s, what was once one cultures had become two, and I am interested in the differences between the two Germanys after twenty to thirty years as separate countries.
In this paper, I examine several East and West German sex education books, interrogating their understandings of femininity, sexuality, and body and trying to draw out their understandings of embodiment and subjectivity. I argue that the West German sources, through a focus on the biological body, understood women as being defined -- both individually and socially -- by reproduction, motherhood, passivity, and Hausfraulichkeit (housewifeliness). Moreover, they conceived of sexuality as coital and centred on the satisfaction of male desire and on reproduction within heterosexual marriage. The East German sources, on the other hand, treated gender and sexuality as fundamentally social and cultural issues, rejecting biological understandings as inadequate. This, combined with their Marxist ideology and the East German state emphasis on equality, led them to focus on sexual equality in all areas of life, from the workforce to the bedroom. They understood sexuality, furthermore, as something intrinsic to subjectivity, and focused on mutual sexual pleasure as central to happiness in partnership (not necessarily marriage) and life. Ultimately, they stressed that full personhood and especially pleasure were only truly possible within socialism and through an embodied socialist subjectivity.
The most immediate difference between the East and West German sex education books is their entirely different conceptualizations of sexuality, particularly their starkly different disciplinary perspectives. The West German sources focus on biology, emphasizing puberty as the process of reaching reproductive maturity. For instance, the two editions of Sexualkunde-Atlas, published in 1969 and 1974 by the Federal Centre for Health Education, only discuss biological issues (such as reproduction, contraception, abortion, menstruation, and so on), as, ostensibly, does Adelina Husslein (a female Austrian gynaecologist) in her 1969 ABC für junge Mädchen. Similarly, the authors of Junge, Mädchen, Mann und Frau devote about 115 of 150 pages of their volume for twelve-to sixteen-year olds (henceforth JMMF 2) to biological concerns,9 and only in their volume for eight-to twelve-years olds (henceforth JMMF 1) does the space given to biology drop to as little as 58 of 95 pages.10 This overwhelming focus on biology belies any claim, such as those found in JMMF 1 and ABC für junge Mädchen, that sexuality or puberty are not just biological.11This focus on biology takes the form of extensive examinations of anatomy, reproduction, hormones, and the bodily changes during adolescence.
Certainly, this biological focus is understandable given the medical backgrounds of several of the authors (Husslein; Karl Horst Wrage, one of the authors of JMMF; and, presumably, at least some of the unnamed authors of SKA). Moreover, each of these was approved for instructional use in various provinces' classrooms. Further, as Lutz Sauerteig has shown, sex education in Germany from Weimar on tended to emphasize biology. Thus, they integrated sex education into biology classes and stressed the biological rather than social aspects of sexuality, which it left to parents. This was, indeed, codified in 1977 after the Federal Constitutional Court ruled that sex education is primarily the concern of parents, though the state had a right to offer sex education so long as it did not "indoctrinate" or impinge on parents' natural rights. While this focus on sex education as biology is consequently predictable, it permitted only a particular (and limiting) form of sex education on the assumption that parents will fill in the necessary blanks, something belied by the fact that well into the 1990s most children got the majority of their knowledge on sexual matters from friends or youth magazines such as Bravo.15
This focus on the biological aspects of puberty led to a focus on gender and sexuality as biologically determined, and that essential social differences exist between men and women. Thus Husslein, for instance, says that "estrogen is what makes a woman what she is" (despite acknowledging the presence of testosterone in women's bodies) and says that "female psyche... [and] disposition (Gemüt) [are] so completely different as [those] of the male."
In the East German sources, in contrast, such biological and anatomical details -- which one might expect in sex education literature -- are almost totally absent; indeed, they say that biological understandings of gender and sexuality are simply inadequate.18 Thus, for instance, Junge Frauen heute Junge Frauen heute spends just two paragraphs of its 90 pages discussing developmental and sexual biology, and Junge Ehe heute gives biology no space at all, save mentioning its inadequacy. On the other hand, Adam und Eva heute spends about fifteen pages discussing biological differences (almost exclusively those relating to different body size), and insists that these imply no differences on a social level, besides situating this discussion in a larger chapter focused on the primacy of social and cultural conditions to gender. Instead, they emphasize the primacy of social and cultural elements in the formation of gender and sexuality, partly by reference to Marxist theory, and partly through empirical and historical observations about the historically contingent and culturally specific nature of such ideas.21 The authors of Junge Frauen heute, for instance, say that "the importance of a person's gender to their development and social position is no biological question, rather, society establishes what it means to be female or male."
This East German abnegation of biological understandings is doubtless related to the authors' work in a social-scientific research centre on youth, the Zentralinstitut für Jugendforschung (ZIJ).24As far as sex education goes, they drew on the disciplinary methods and outlooks of sociology, psychology, and sexology. Moreover, the authors' work in the ZIJ gave them access to considerable amounts of quantitative and qualitative research (much of which they had personally helped to conduct), as well as privileged access to pertinent western scientific literature. Their disciplinary outlook doubtless influenced their belief in inadequacy of biological understandings of gender and sexuality and education thereto, as would the Marxism inherent to East German research and the SED's emphasis on equality.
Accompanying these different disciplinary conceptualizations of gender and sexuality were different normalization strategies and rhetorical devices. The biological focus of the West German sex education books allowed the authors to implicitly normalize certain behaviours, passing culturally determined beliefs off as natural and ergo inviolable. Specifically, it led to a focus on models of the norm. Thus, they cast certain behaviours and patterns of development as the biologically determined route, and suggested, furthermore, that any deviations from the norm are biologically problematic, indeed ipso facto pathological. Thus, for instance, the authors of JMMF 2 argued against such things as sadism, masochism, transvestitism, zoophilia, necrophilia, exhibitionism, fetishism, masturbation (if practiced too often), and homosexuality.25 Moreover, the West German sources defined the norms of sexuality and gender by reference to what they considered abnormal -- for instance the unnaturality of mothers working, the emotional shallowness of group sex, the impropriety of men caring for children or doing housework, or the perverted nature of homosexuality.26 (Interestingly, this seems to conform fairly precisely to Foucault's suggestion that sexual norms in the late nineteenth century were established through an "incitement to discourse" and "perverse implantation," whereby the norm was established through frequent reference to various deviations from it.27)
By referencing biology and thereby casting their pronouncements as natural, the West German sources could veil the fact they were normalizing specific behaviours, something supported through frequent references to morality. Indeed, the not infrequent references to various social institutions such as law, state, society, churches, and morality -- which might suggest the social nature of such norms and moralities -- typically came with comments about how these institutions were simply reflecting the natural, biological order or securing it from social dangers. Thus, for instance, Husslein references religion as supporting biological laws, with the two being useful in finding a "middle way" between the "false prudery" and "total prohibition ( Verbot) of yesterday" and protecting against the "assault (Überfall) of the sexual" in "our hectic times" (i.e. the sexual revolution).28
The East German sources were more open and explicit about their normalization of specific practices of gender and sexuality. This should hardly surprise; after all, they strongly emphasize the primacy of society in determining such things. Thus, they stress that norms of gender and sexuality are social and fluid, arguing that every society has norms, even East Germany.29 Yet they insisted that socialist norms were flexible, that everyone has a right to experience desire, pleasure, romance, and so on as an individual and in their own. Combined with the fact that they describe very little of what is abnormal as regards sexuality or gender (except for inequality and therefore capitalism), they end up -- perhaps counter intuitively -- stressing a greater degree of individuality vis-à-vis gender and sexuality than do the West German sources, though their silence about homosexuality constructs it as abnormal. Moreover, they stress the importance of socialism, the state, and society in setting progressive norms of sexuality and gender, and in educating people to these norms. This occurs with frequent denigrations of earlier or other systems (implicitly or explicitly capitalism), with occasional references to how much better off women are in East Germany than elsewhere.31
The importance of socialism also appears as the justification for leaving sex education primarily to schools. While acknowledging that parents provide their children with initial and crucial modelling of and information about gender and sexuality (and that parents should take care to raise their children correctly, not least because gender and sexuality are relatively fixed after childhood), they emphasize that proper (i.e. socialist) sex education is a pedagogical problem for schools.32 In Junge Ehe heute, for instance, the authors say that "the leading role in sex education belongs to schools," though schools, doctors, parents, and youth groups (meaning the "Free German Youth" of FDJ, the East German youth group, membership in which was effectively mandatory) all have important roles in teaching children good socialist gender norms.33 Thus, the East German schools seem to have integrated sex education into a wide variety of classes, not just biology, but also German and foreign languages, history and geography, civics (" "
The femininity constructed in each country's sex education literature was markedly different. The femininity implied in the East German books was that of a gleichberechtigt worker and mother who should be equal in work, home, bedroom, and politics, but happened nonetheless to carry the bulk of household duties. Thus, these sources largely reified what Elizabeth Heineman has identified as East German women's "quadruple burden of political engagement, paid work, childcare, and housework."
The West German sources, in contrast, presented a picture of womanhood dominated by marriage, maternality and Hausfraulichkeit, an "equal but different" femininity. A woman's anatomical ability to bear children was understood to indicate her place in the home rather than the workforce, particularly if she had children (despite female rates of employment that were, in reality, fairly high, if not so high as in the GDR). Moreover, this idea led to a treatment of femininity and specifically motherhood as emotional bordering on mystical, and an emphasis on woman as passive objects rather than active subjects. This passive, maternalist idea of femininity dictated a variety of legal measures to assist or coerce women to stay at home. In the first instance, they suggest an essential difference between an active, public, paterfamiliar masculinity and a passive, private, domestic, maternal femininity defined by reproduction. In the first instance, they suggest an essential difference between an active, public, paterfamiliar masculinity and a passive, private, domestic, maternal femininity defined by reproduction.
The femininity presented in the East German sources was centred on Gleichberechtigung, socialism, and the worker-mother. Key to East German notions of socialist gender norms was an insistence on men and women's " "
This is not to say that mention of differences was absent -- in fact, JungeJunge Frauen heute Frauen heute mentions that men have greater sexual desire and cannot know what it feels like to have a baby kicking inside them, while women cannot understand the frustration of un-reciprocated sexual desire39 -- , just that whatever social or behavioural differences between men and women existed were said to stem not from biology but from culture. One of the reasons this idea came up so frequently was that women still were the primary housekeepers in East Germany, a practice they argued against as archaic, unequal, and non-socialist practice. The sources ascribe the slowness of this change despite supposedly complete economic equality of men and women (that is, the removal of what, under Marxist theory, causes sexual division of labour) to the greater difficulty of changing gender ideas in "subjective" areas (e.g. family and personal relationships) than "objective" ones (such as work and politics).
What exactly did Gleichberechtigung mean in East German sex education literature? In the first instance, the emphasis was not on the equality of women, but on the equality of the sexes (" "
These sources also stressed that there were several things Gleichberechtigung was not. For instance, one source suggested that it did not mean identity between men and women -- such as girls behaving as badly as boys (which seems to be an essentialized difference, their renunciations thereof notwithstanding) or men bearing children -- , nor was it meant to eliminate the positive tension ("Spannungsfeld") between the sexes.45 Interestingly, Junge Frauen heute says that Gleichberechtigungdoes not include gender parity in all professions or areas of the economy, but does not explain this comment further despite, its insistence on equal participation in life and the economy notwithstanding.46
These sources mention several reasons why Gleichberechtigungis important. In the first instance, they all cite the importance of equality to socialist ideology, variously mentioning Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels, Vladimir Lenin, August Bebel, Erich Honecker, Mikhail Gorbachev, and the programme of the SED (the Socialist Unity Party, the East German communist party). Second, they all stress the lack of essential difference between men and women, and thus the unjustifiableness of social inequality, consequently presenting Gleichberechtigungas something that goes without saying. Third, comparing socialist and capitalist gender relations in a way the West German sources never do, they argue that the socialist, gleichberechtigte
The West German sources had a different idea of equality. That is, they argue that men and women have different roles in family and society, but are not ipso facto unequal; indeed, they echo the longstanding idea in Germany that women are 'equal but different.'52 For instance, the authors of JMMF 1 say that while women's work in supporting the family is different from men's it is no less important and neither men nor women were "disadvantaged (benachteiligt)," and insists that women should have the right to participate in decisions (" "
The most obvious difference posited between men and women is that women appear as oriented to or even solely defined by the ability to become mothers (" "
Strengthening the portrayal of reproduction as the telos of femininity associations of the female reproductive cycle with waste and failure. Emily Martin has shown that descriptions of reproductive biology tend to suggest that the female reproductive cycle is wasteful, first because women are born with all of their eggs rather than producing them like men do; second because so few of women's ovarian follicles reach maturity (ignoring that for every egg "wasted," there are perhaps three to five billion sperm); and third because so few mature eggs are inseminated. She shows, moreover, how most scientific literature portrays menstruation as a sign of waste, of failure to reproduce, with illustrations of the uterine lining during menstruation showing a shedding of "debris," a "chaotic disintegration of form."
The association of women with reproduction -- and of failure to reproduce with waste -- also comes through in discussions of contraception and abortion. This is perhaps understandable, given that almost all contraceptive technologies are for women's bodies, as of course is abortion. While contraception does not appear as explicitly wasteful, it is portrayed as a purely female issue. That is, these West German sources describe various methods of contraception in terms of female choice and responsibility, even in the context of family planning. Moreover, the overwhelming attention paid to reproductive technologies for women gives an impression that contraception is for women alone, particularly when reproduction appears as almost exclusively a female concern. Discussion of condoms presents the only exception to the female-oriented discussions of contraception, but only partly. While each source (save JMMF 1) mentions condoms, they do not suggest that men take responsibility for protection against pregnancy or venereal disease. Thus, the sources largely ignore men's role in reproduction, and do not take encourage any understanding of reproductive issues as something other than a purely female issue, and they fail to encourage boys and young men to take more responsibility.61
Discussions of abortion also focus on reproduction as the telos of womanhood.62 Every source (save the one directed at eight-to eleven-year-olds, in which it does not appear) condemns abortion -- often quite harshly -- as an immoral and criminal act, for instance the comment in JMMF 2 that "every abortion is the killing of a growing (werdende) human life,... (something that) cannot be subordinated to the whim and pleasure (Belieben und Willkür) of the individual."
The authors of these West German sources essentialize women's reproductivity into social difference. In the first instance, they portray women as passive. Thus, almost all of the sources discuss coitus in terms of active male penetration and movement, and all depictions of how it works show the man on top.65 Moreover, these sources describe more social aspects of sexuality in similarly gendered ways. For instance, JMMF 2 suggests that the process of men and women getting to know each other (" "
Similarly, the reproductive understanding of femininity gives rise to an emphasis on female Hausfraulichkeit(housewifeliness). Thus, for instance, several sources mention that fathers work to support the family materially while mothers stay at home to take care of the house and to emotionally devote themselves to the family.69
Beyond being portrayed as wasteful, the female reproductive cycle shown as disruptive and deviant, justifying medical observation and intervention. Thus one finds comments that new mothers may not breastfeed their babies on the first day -- when babies get only a "tea with grape sugar (Tee mit Traubenzucker)" -- , that pregnancy can be endanger a woman's health, or that doctors should decide whether a young woman uses tampons or menstrual pads (not least because of the apparently calamitous risk of breaking a virgin's hymen, as if it had some crucial biological function).73 Moreover, the general portrayal of the menstrual cycle suggests that both menstruation and ovulation are somehow abnormal and troublesome, and indicate special and aberrant hygiene and behaviour.74 Pregnancy also comes across as disruptive and abnormal, despite its naturalness and status as the ideal state, the completion of a woman's body, though the authors never resolve this conflict. Husslein gives perhaps the best example of this, describing corporeal and psychological disruptions in the first and third trimesters while extolling pregnancy as "an even that brings the woman fulfilment."
The East German emphasis on Gleichberechtigungcarried with it certain forms of intervention. Thus, the sources mention the help given by the state to help women stay in the workforce (e.g. extensive childcare and legal protection of employment during the comparatively generous guaranteed maternity leave) as well as the DDR's various pro-natalist policies, such as neonatal care, childcare facilities, maternity leave, and financial incentives.76 Similarly, the pre-eminent place overtly given to schools in educating to socialist norms of gender and sexuality represents an intervention for the sake of Gleichberechtigung. Behind the scenes, moreover, another set of state interventions occurred. Although researched and written autonomously (if in a state-supported research institute), these books were subject to state sanction. Ute Schlegel (a.k.a. Bruhm-Schlegel), one of the authors of Junge Frauen heute, later mentioned how difficult it was to have Junge Frauen heute published, due to official interference.77
East and West German sex education books also had different ideas about the telos of sexuality and its role in subjectivity. The Western sources sexuality as stemming from the body, centred on the genitalia, focused on reproduction, and located within marriage. Thus, they emphasized the biological nature of the sexual drive and of satisfaction, normalized coitus as the real form of sexuality, and discussed everything in reference to marriage and family. Moreover, their emphasis on reproduction and coitus helped to focus sex on male desires and pleasures, largely ignoring women's. But this purely biological sexuality was not something divorced from personhood; by being part of the body, it was part of one's experiences and thus indirectly one's selfhood. Ultimately though, sex appears as something done out of need and natural drive than pleasure, desire, or love, especially for women.
The East German sex education books, however, portrayed a markedly different sexuality. While still basing sexuality in the heterosexual couple, they placed it at the centre of personhood and relationships, and emphasized pleasure and equality in the bedroom. In keeping with their de-emphasizing of biology and anatomy, they did not discuss sex as something primarily genital, and stressed that sexuality was primarily about pleasure rather than reproduction. Moreover, they insisted on the equal rights of women and men to pleasure in the bedroom, and emphasized that the clitoris rather than the vagina was the "orgasm-triggering (orgasmusauslösend)" organ for most women.78 This had the effect of implicitly normalizing non-coital practices such as oral and manual genital stimulation. Moreover, it helped encourage couples -- and, combined with the insistence that male lack of skill was a major cause of female anorgasmia, particularly men -- to take responsibility for ensuring female orgasm, and was coincident with increased female orgasm rates.79 Finally, rather than being a biological drive to reproduction as in the West German sources, sexuality here comes across as something directly central to individuality, to personhood, and to relationships. Thus, the East German sources emphasize that everyone has a somewhat different experience of sexuality and pleasure, and the importance of sexuality not only to establishing a couple (and family), but also to personal happiness.80
In the West German sources, biology and reproduction dominate discussions of sexuality. That is, in keeping with the authors' disciplinary backgrounds, sex is discussed in almost exclusively anatomical and reproductive terms. They portrayed women's sexuality, furthermore, as passive and centred on procreation. Thus Husslein, for instance, says that "for the emotionally (seelisch) mature young woman, love culminates in the wish to symbolize the union in a child,... [a] wish most strongly felt during sex," and that "a woman deceives herself when she seeks only sexual satisfaction from the bodily union and bans from her world of feeling everything that has to do with motherhood and love of child (Liebe zum Kind)."
The anatomical and reproductive focus of these West German books leads to the presentation of sex as something primarily centred on coitus, the genitals, and pleasure (narrowly understood as orgasm). Thus, their discussions of sex are restricted to explanations of genital reactions and coitus. Similarly, they denigrate masturbation as, at best, a "first rehearsal (erstes Einüben)" for the coitus and describe it as immature and dangerous if persistent.82 Similarly, the few brief mentions of such things as kissing, touching, and "Petting" (which in German includes almost anything short of coitus) all focus on them leading up to coitus, that is, they are nothing more than foreplay.83 Ultimately, by focusing primarily on the " "
The East German authors, in contrast, ignore biology and barely discuss reproduction in their discussions of sexuality. Instead, they stress that sexuality is, indeed, primarily about partnership and individual happiness (" "
Moreover, the East German authors proffer a sexuality not at all focused on coitus and the genitals. Thus, for instance, they all insist that sexual encounters should, wherever possible, include orgasm for the woman, and that rushing to the " "
The West German authors' focus on coitus, biology, and reproduction suggest that sexuality is something naturally circumscribed by heterosexual marriages, or at least romantic relations heading thither. The emphasis on marriage as the proper site for marriage is variously supported, for instance through denigrations of pre-marital sexuality, condemnations of extra-marital and group sexuality, and the simple fact that marital sexuality is only kind not mentioned as abnormal. 95 Interestingly, the biological focus of these sources also colours their descriptions of heterosexual relations: the absence of social context and sexual ethics -- let alone the complete silence over desire96 -- make heterosexuality appear almost automatic and animalistic, excluding love, romance, desire, or passion.
Central to this West Germany heteronormativity is the portrayal of other forms of sexuality as abnormal and unnatural. Thus, despite mentioning alternate sexualities, the authors denigrate them -- especially homosexuality -- as tantamount to illnesses, particularly homosexuality. Of particular importance here are, on the one hand, the silence and, on the other hand, the not so subtly deprecatory comments about homosexuality (though two sources say that puberty can naturally include a homoerotic phase).97 Husslein, for instance, labels homosexuality an "a change,... a reversal,... an aberration from the natural, a perversion, a deviation."
The East German authors, too, identify the heterosexual couple as sexuality's natural locus, but -- not surprisingly -- with different justifications and implications. Thus, masturbation finds a few paragraphs' mention in Adam und Eva heute, but only as something preparatory); all other mentions of sexuality locate it the couple.102 Moreover, Junge Frauen heute warns against a "thoughtless, frequent change of partners (bedenkenloser häufiger Wechsel des Partners)" as something removing the emotional depths necessary to happiness, thus centring sexuality on a monogamous couple.103 Moreover, homosexuality does not appear in these sources, except for an uncaptioned, uncontextualized, sudden picture of two women in an intimate embrace.104
Nonetheless, the East German authors do not restrict sexuality specifically to marriage or the family, or even suggest these as the necessary direction. Thus, Junge Frauen heute encouragingly mentions that "for almost all of our youth -- boys as well as girls -- premarital sex has become a matter of course (ist zu etwas Selbstverständlichem geworden)."
But the proper locus of sexuality according to these books is not just the heterosexual couple; it is the socialist heterosexual couple. To that end, one finds constant references to Gleichberechtigungwithin the heterosexual couple, including equal sharing of housework duties, equal rights to pleasure, and acceptance of women working. They emphasize, likewise, the greater freedom and sexual pleasure women and men have in socialism than in capitalism, with its three Ks112 and "mercenary love (käufliche Liebe)."
This emphasis on the socialist couple was accompanied by a sexual ethics of respectability that had certain similarities to the West German one, yet also marked and growing differences. For instance, the stress on marital fidelity, the desirability of avoiding divorce, and the objectionable nature of changing partners frequently, are all very similar to the conservative, bourgeois, capitalist, or Christian (whichever term one prefers) morality in West Germany. 117 This doubtless rested on the two Germanys' common cultural roots, but it was in keeping with East Germany's longstanding focus on respectability.118 Yet the differences made clear above reflect the divergence of the two Germanys. Particularly important here is what Dagmar Herzog has called East Germany's "Sexual Evolution," whereby ideas of gender and sexuality were more gradually relaxed than in West Germany, with its Sexual Revolution.119
These different understandings of sexuality included divergent views on sexual pleasure, although both understand sexual pleasure and orgasm as synonymous. The West German emphasis on coitus informed their understanding of pleasure. With coitus the only sexual act described in detail, pleasure is automatically centred thereon, and they also stressed the mutual pleasurableness for both partners. Thus, several sources emphasize the general simultaneity of male and female orgasm in coitus, while acknowledging that women do not always orgasm.120 (Interestingly, several authors discuss the ability of women to orgasm several times without a refractory period, which stands in contradiction with the idea that orgasms are simultaneous, given the refractory period for men).121 Furthermore, Husslein repeats the Freudian thesis that the vagina is the proper and mature centre of orgasm while the clitoral orgasm is immature, and I would suggest that other sources' stress on coital orgasm for women and their silence about the clitoral orgasm suggests they would agree with the thesis of the immature clitoral orgasm.122 These sources, however, emphasize the male orgasm over the female, either by saying women do not always orgasm, or by mentioning the female orgasm only in passing (they do not encourage men to do anything about women's lower orgasm rate).
Discussing sexuality in biological terms also affects the West German authors' understanding of pleasure. Each of them portrays the purpose of sex as, first, reproduction, and second, satisfaction (" "
The East German insistence on equality in (heterosexual) relationships and their de-emphasis of coitus influenced their ideas of pleasure. In line with their focus on the primary importance of the personal rather than reproductive aspects of sex, they place pleasure at the centre of sexuality. Thus, they describe sexual pleasure (identified, as in the West German sources, with orgasm) with such words as "happiness (Glück),"
With different concepts of femininity, sexuality, and pleasure come different understandings of the body. The West German sex education books, through their biological focus, constructed a view of the body as something distinct from -- if attached to -- one's personhood; thus, sexuality was, in the first instance, a biological urge coming from the body. Nevertheless, because one's body was part of one's experience, sexuality was, indirectly, a part of subjectivity. Moreover, they understood the body as defining essential gender roles, thus directing sexual subjectivity in specific directions (i.e. passivity, Hausfraulichkeit, and maternality for women. Despite the understanding of these roles as defined by "natural law," the West German sources insisted that regulation and tutelage of was required to uphold them, for instance through Mutterschutz. 133 Ultimately, these sources attempt to educate control of sexual drives, normalizing specific bodily sexual practices, specifically coitus. Thus, these sources viewed the individual body as something requiring regulation, placing it -- especially the female body -- in the broader social body. Thus, they participated in the embodiment of what had been "normalization," but had, by the early 1970s, become a normality fighting less against the supposed libertinism of the Nazis than against the "bombardment of sexuality (Überfall der Geschlechtlichkeit)" and "Hippy mentality" of the "champions of 'free love' "
The focus on biology and the deviance and inadequacy of women's bodies and reproductive cycles suggests that these sources viewed women's bodies as biological objects, for instance through Husslein's frequent references to the "female organism."
The East German sources, on the other hand, viewed the body quite differently. On the one hand, they approached the body not from the standpoint of biology but empirical social sciences. This doubtless played a role in their understanding of the body in terms of social and individual experience. Moreover, they viewed bodily pleasure and experience -- and consequently the body itself -- as part of one's subjectivity, rather than upholding a sharp divide between mind and body. This focus on the body as part of the person combined with their emphasis on socialist morality to form a picture of embodied socialist subjectivity; that is, they portrayed gleichberechtigte bodily behaviour as part of a socialist subjectivity to which pleasure was central.
These East German sex education books understand the female body partly as an integral (and reproductive) part of the social body, and partly as a site of tutelage to socialist personhood, but primarily as something personal and experiential.138 By focusing on the romance, pleasure, emotional depth, relational aspects, and personal nature, and largely ignoring its biological and reproductive facets, they emphasize the centrality of bodies to individuals, the integration of mind and body. Even references to reproduction are cast more in light of individual and familial experience than in terms of a social of racial body. Concomitant with this is the emphasis on educating to socialist gender and sexuality, but here too the focus is on creating socialist individuals in society.
What do all of these differences -- in understandings of femininity, of sexuality, of body -- mean to ideas of subjectivity and the meaning of personhood in East and West Germany? Ultimately, they suggest different conceptions of the relationship between body, sexuality, and subjectivity. The West German sources suggest that the body defines one's place in society and directs one's subjectivity, but does not restrict one from being an individual within those limits. Within this framework, they embodied their understanding of a "normal" (a la Schissler), natural sexual subjectivity, defined for women by Hausfraulichkeitand reproduction. Yet this embodiment is implicit, hidden behind the authority of science and "natural laws," and this stress on the immutable nature of embodiment suggests that these specific gender norms are always already embodied a priori anything.139
The East Germans, in contrast, ultimately present an embodied socialist subjectivity for the worker-mother. That is, they portray a femininity and sexual subjectivity incorporating and incorporated in Gleichberechtigungof men and women in (ostensibly) all aspects of life, from the workplace to the family, from the political world to the bedroom, especially work, pleasure, activism and political participation, and (silently) women's "quadruple burden."
Moreover, they explicitly construct this embodied socialist citizenship in opposition to an inferior, hierarchical capitalist gender system that allows neither men nor women full subjectivity, much less happiness. Thus, they condemn capitalist (i.e. West German) gender for its oppression of women through Hausfraulichkeit; for its mercenary sexuality (in terms of the economic basis of marriage law and the existence of both prostitution and the commercialized sex industry); its moral double standards in expecting virginity of brides but not grooms; for its "overemphasis and one-sided-ness of sexuality (Überbetonung und Vereinseitigung des Sexuellen)"; for its failure or refusal to grant women equal legal standing or educational or employment opportunities; and for its imposition of strictly limiting gender behaviours that allow neither men nor (especially) women to be truly emotionally or even sexually satisfied.146 Dagmar Herzog would argue that this is part of a broader pattern in which East German discourse about sex emphasized that "socialism, in short, was not just about better love; it was about better sex."
The West German sources focused on biology, reproduction, and morality, largely ignoring the personal maturation involved in growing up, which appears almost exclusively as the biological process of reaching reproductive maturity. They used this focus on biology to normalize a housewifely and reproductive femininity, a marital and reproductive sexuality, and an idea of sexual satisfaction centred on the male and circumscribed by the body, separated from subjectivity. Moreover, they understood the female body as, on the one hand, something physical and not integrated into one's subjectivity, and, on the other hand, as a reproductive part of the social body requiring intervention and tutelage to their reproductive nature, something understood as the main or even sole purpose of the female body. They also stressed the heterosexual married couple as the natural locus of sexuality. While acknowledging the existence of and urging tolerance for homosexuality, and discussing some "further forms of sexuality" other than reproductive heterosexuality, they still focused attention on reproduction and paterfamiliar marriages. Ultimately, the West German sources stressed the normality and satisfaction of an essentialized, hierarchal gender system, and one that is automatically embodied prior to anything social or personal.
On the other hand, the East German sources insisted on the social and cultural nature of gender, on the importance of Gleichberechtigungin all aspects of life, on the primacy in sexuality of pleasure over reproduction, and on embodying socialist subjectivity. Moreover, despite allowing greater individual freedom within heterosexuality, they ignored homosexuality completely. Their understanding of sexuality focused on its personal and relational aspects, and on pleasure. Simultaneously, the authors stressed the pleasure of agleichberechtigte socialist subjectivity and its superiority to capitalist gender norms (the West German sources, remember, were entirely silent about East Germany). Moreover, the East German authors understood the body as being an essential and experiential part of the person. By suggesting the importance of socialism in facilitating the comfortable and pleasurable integration of mind and body, they focused on embodying a pleasurable socialist subjectivity.
