For Hegel, Marx, and Nietzsche, History plays a central role in each of their respective philosophies, revealing the dialectical relationship between temporality and the search for meaning. First, Hegel's History is the "object-level" unfolding of the self-determined "Notion," his term of art concerning the classic Idealist problematic of how, as finite beings, we can ever be sure that our objects of knowledge correspond to what there actually "is." For Marx, History remains "dialectical" in the Hegelian sense, but only insofar as the standard Idealist formulation is inverted: instead of self-consciousness determining objects of thought, Marx views ideas and collective practices as the products of material conditions and processes. Furthermore, both Hegel and Marx view History as progressing towards some Truth, either as Freedom (Hegel) or as Communism (Marx), the realization of a classless society. On the other hand, Nietzsche is ostensibly opposed to the notions of progress and Truth in History, conceiving of it as "perspectival." Nevertheless, Nietzsche seems to offer his own notion of progress with his vision of a post-historical Übermensch.
Before delving into his Philosophy of History, an important clarification ought to be made regarding Hegel's philosophic position: first, Hegel does not think of History as the eternal extension of some transcendent metaphysical One (i.e., Spinoza's sub specie aeternitatis), nor does he conceive of it as a mere atomistic flux à la Heraclitus. What Hegel has in mind, rather, is that: (1) History is dialectical, the "development of Spirit in Time "
In The German Ideology, Marx offers his theory of "materialist" History as the progressive development of the forces of production, contra Hegel's Idealism. For Marx, History begins, not with the coming-to-be of self-consciousness, but rather with the "production of the means to satisfy human needs."
On the other hand, Nietzsche ostensibly rejects any notion of progress and, in fact, thinks of himself as opposed to any such "History" conceived in this light. Instead, Nietzsche uses the term "genealogy" to designate the critical method of evaluating historically developed power relationships obscured by our reification of various concepts, attitudes, and social relations, similar to Marx's formulation ideology as "false consciousness." The most famous example of this method of understanding history can be found in The Genealogy of Morals, where Nietzsche utilizes his philological expertise to evaluate the etymological origins of morality. He analyzes the binaries of "good" and "bad,"
The various philosophic attitudes toward History of Hegel-Marx-Nietzsche may now be reformulated into a dialectical triad of Idealist-Materialist-Perspectival. For Hegel, History is the development of Spirit, the result of consciousness determining itself within the domain of collective social practice. For Marx, however, History is the development of productive forces, how material conditions determine consciousness and social being. Finally, for Nietzsche, History is the unity of various perspectives and the way in which they constitute power relationships that govern our consciousness of Time and ourselves. Yet, within all of these formulations, each of the three philosophers offers various visions of progress and freedom, constituting a final triad of Self-Consciousness-Communism-Übermensch.
