While it should be one part of a comprehensive strategy to reduce our emissions, there are fewer technological opportunities that could do more to help the U.S. simultaneously address the problem of emissions, an ailing domestic automotive sector, and dependence on foreign oil than a transition to electric drive trains in passenger vehicles. Enabled by incremental improvements in the energy and power density of advanced battery technologies, Plug-In-Hybrid Vehicles (PHEV's) will soon provide breakthrough advances that will also be able to meet consumer expectations of price, range, top speed, and acceleration. Likewise, these vehicles may also provide ancillary benefits, such as distributed storage that could help balance the electric loads of utilities.
PHEV's will receive a portion of their energy from the electric grid, with the remainder being supplied by an on-board generator that runs on fossil fuels. This could equate to a gasoline savings of 75% with a battery pack that provides a range of 40-45 miles under normal driving conditions, such as in the Chevy Volt. Depending upon energy source provided by the grid CO2 emissions could be expected to be 20%-50% of a conventional vehicle. (Electric Power Research Institute, 2007)
PHEV's are needed because they represent the best near-term technological possibility to:
PHEV's with an all-electric range of 40 miles are currently technically achievable at an estimated cost of $30,000 - $40,000. The greatest challenge lies in finding the appropriate ways in which to bring down the upfront costs of PHEV's, and especially in the battery packs, which make up close to 75% of the additional costs associated with hybrid configurations in most models (Anderman, 2007). Operating PHEV's are cheaper and more environmentally friendly than operating gasoline or diesel vehicles at almost every comparable level of fuel and electricity prices. However, policies are needed in order to drive developments in PHEV technology in order to:
In order to drive development of PHEV technology it will take a sustained effort, an increase in federal contribution to R&D around battery technologies, and a mix of policies to smooth the adoption of this technology for producers and customers (Schafer, 2003). It is necessary to stimulate not only the consumption of these vehicles, but also to stimulate the production of key technologies within the United States. This is not only critical to job creation, it is critical to energy security. If the United States pays for the transition to an electric vehicle infrastructure then it should do its best to protect the IP that is developed in the process. The best way of doing this is to manufacture within the borders of the U.S..
Because of the massive raw materials costs, the federal government should consider providing support either for the production of these materials in the U.S., or structuring of more favorable subsidies for battery chemistries that use more raw materials that can be produced in the U.S. at scale. Furthermore, the global supply of certain raw materials should be evaluated to ensure that chemistries that utilize more rare metals would be scalable to production of several million vehicles per year. Without some thought given to planning ahead, the U.S. could end up in a situation whereby reducing the dependence on foreign oil it increases dependence on some imported commodity metal used in the battery packs in PHEV's. With policies based on evaluation of the entire value chain for production of PHEV's, the U.S. will be able to stimulate production of batteries used in PHEV's in a way that will reduce U.S. dependence on foreign oil, reduce carbon emissions, and have large percentage of the value created within U.S. borders. PHEV's offer tremendous potential to the future of personal transportation and U.S. industry but it will take smart policy to optimize these benefits for the U.S.
A plug-in hybrid electric vehicle (PHEV) is defined as any hybrid electric vehicle which contains at least:
This is distinguished from hybrids that are currently being mass-marketed, such as the Toyota Prius, which do not use any electricity from the grid.
The Chevy Volt is the first plug-in hybrid with a 100% electric drive-train advertised to be released commercially, with a targeted release date of 2010. Toyota is also planning to release a plug-in version of the Prius in 2010, but this will have dual gas and electric drivetrains. The Volt is considered a greater technological advance for this reason, and it will also be the first vehicle to incorporate lithium-ion batteries. Toyota has not committed to whether they will incorporate lithium ion batteries or if they will stick with the nickel-metal hydride batteries currently being used in the Prius, which are heavier and have a lower energy density. The plug-in Prius will only be able to travel 7 miles in all-electric mode in comparison to the 40 miles the Volt is claiming it will offer (after a 6-hour charge).
Hybrid-Electric Vehicles (HEVs) sales made up over 0.7% of total global new car production in 2006, 60% of which were in the U.S. market, where it accounted for 1.3% of total car sales. Hybrid technology has spread to fifteen car models across several vehicles classes. (Anderman, 2007)
A recent study performed by the Electric Power Research Institute and the NRDC showed that adoption of PHEV's would reduce emissions of greenhouse gases, NOx, VOC's, SO2, ozone, and particulate matter.
The study's GHG analysis included evaluating several scenarios of PHEV fleet penetration and electric sector CO2 intensity. Significant reductions in CO2 were found in each of nine different scenario combinations. Cumulative reduction in GHG emissions from 2010 to 2050 due to adoption of PHEV's could range from 3.4 to 10.3 billion metric tons.
The current generation of hybrids contains almost exclusively Ni-MH batteries. The major automakers have committed to developing high- powered Li-ion batteries for the next generation of hybrids. All-electric vehicles like the Tesla Roadster generally have enough power available due to the size of the pack and choose to go with Li-ion high energy cells in order to extend the total vehicle range.
However, this chart only shows the technical specifications of batteries, where the price per Wh is often the key component, and where lithium-ion currently has a much higher cost per Wh (generally though to be in the $2-$5 per Wh range). Potential to develop batteries with comparable energy density and power density to lithium-ion cells exists at a much lower $ per Wh range. In theory, zinc-air batteries offers some of the best potential to achieve this cost effectively on the basis of power and energy density but would require additional battery-servicing infrastructure due to shorter cycle life and the potential need to swap out batteries or to replace the contents of the batteries with zinc pellets. While it appears certain that lithium-ion will be the next major transition in battery chemistries it is unclear where that direction will be headed in ten years time, although it is certain that reducing the cost per Wh of capacity will be a key driver.
One serious consideration that any policy surrounding PHEV's should consider is the source of the batteries, and materials incorporated in the batteries, within PHEV's that are being supported by government regulation or subsidies. Currently, Japanese suppliers provide over 60% of the world's lithium-ion battery demand, with Korean and Chinese suppliers sharing the bulk of the remaining 40%.
In automobiles, two Japanese battery producers, Panosonic EV Energy, a joint venture between Toyota and Panosonic, and Sanyo share over 95% of the $600MM HEV battery market (nearly all of which are NiMH). Cobasys is the only U.S. supplier of batteries to the HEV market, supplying the Saturn Greenliner. Both of these large Japanese battery giants are developing lithium-ion batteries for the emerging HEV and PHEV automotive market, where over twelve companies are expected to be competing. A123 Systems, a U.S.-based company recently received some good news when it was disclosed that they will be one of two suppliers to the Chevy Volt, the first mass-produced PHEV slated to be released.
While the U.S. and Europe have significantly capabilities around battery research, these Asian countries have established a serious gap in the knowledge around advanced battery manufacturing, which has been described as a combination of art and science. The manufacturing of high-volume, low-cost high-powered lithium ion batteries with high levels of reliability is expected to be extremely challenging. Incentives should be provided to begin establishment of this manufacturing knowledge in the U.S. in addition to the research and development that is used to develop the materials being used. (Anderman, 2007)
Battery chemistries should be evaluated for the source and availability of their raw materials in addition to other factors when they are being considered for federal grants or production subsidies. The ideal raw materials will have sufficient global resources and will be available in the U.S. or from a wide variety of international sources. A scale-up of advanced batteries should not lead to anticipation to a spike in materials costs that would suddenly make the cost of the battery pack rise by more than 10-20%.
NICKEL- Nickel is an expensive commodity. Prices have ranged from $10,000 to $50,000 per ton over the past few years. The U.S. also did not have any active nickel mines in 2007. Nickel should be avoided as a material in energy storage technologies unless a significant advantage can be established.
COBALT- The United States did not mine any cobalt in 2007 but has estimated resources of about one million tons. In November 2007 the price of cobalt cathode increased to nearly $40 per pound. Cobalt is not an ideal choice for battery materials from a geo-political and economic perspective.
MANGANESE- Manganese is also used in steel production. Steel-grade Manganese can generally be obtained for only a few dollars per ton. South Africa is though to contain the vast majority (80%) of the world's reserves.
ZINC- Zinc is commonly used in galvanizing, bronze, and alloys, as well as in the agriculture, chemical, paint, and rubber industries. Global reserves of zinc are estimated at 1.9 billion metric tons, with the using containing 90 million metric tons. Global zinc resources are well dispersed.
LITHIUM- It is hotly disputed as to if future prices of lithium will increase or decrease with the growth in demand due to lithium-ion batteries. The U.S. does have a supply of lithium but the vast majority of lithium is available in Chile and Bolivia. However, there could be some issues with availability of groundwater used in production, where groundwater is currently being mined in these deserts to produce vast quantities of lithium at a relatively low cost.
The Chevy Volt is said to have a battery pack of 16kWh, and the U.S. Advanced Battery Consortium says that cars will need packs that hold 40kWh of energy before electric-only cars become acceptable to consumers at a meaningful scale. The Volt's battery pack will weigh 400 pounds. Assuming a price of $2 per Wh, this pack would cost $32,000. Also, Compact Power, one of the two named battery suppliers to the Chevy Volt, has been said to have settled on a manganese spinel blend, which has a higher power density (but somewhat lower energy density) then some of the other available chemistries. (Gustafson, 2008)
Barack Obama's presidential campaign policy included a "New Energy for America" plan that set the goal of putting 1 million PHEV's on the road by 2015 that will be built in America, which will be supported by a specific focus on R&D in advanced battery technology. This policy plan also included a $7,000 tax credit for the purchase of advanced vehicle technology vehicles as well as conversion tax credits. Current hybrid subsidies amount to $2,000 per vehicle. Finally, the policy included a pledge to convert the entire White House fleet to plug-ins within one year of becoming president, and for half of all cars purchased by the federal government to be plug-in hybrids or all-electric vehicles by 2012. (Senator Barack Obama Campaign, 2008)
The United States should pursue policies that will drive adoption of PHEV technology within its borders, but with policies that look beyond the creation of this market and look to creating it in a way that is most beneficial to the United States. PHEV's should also be seen as a potential first step towards a long-term pathway to transition to vehicles powered by hydrogen fuel cells. The key drivers for PHEV policies should be:
Promoting the adoption of PHEV's is an important component of reacting to all of these drivers but additional policy measures are necessary in order to maximize the economic security and benefit to the United States. If U.S. taxpayers are willing to adopt policies that promote PHEV's, there should be some consideration of this adoption as something that will benefit the U.S. economy in the long term. Therefore, efforts should be made to stimulate production of each piece of the PHEV value chain that is possible, within economic reason.
While PHEV's have great potential to help the United States solve its transportation energy problem in the long term, government policy is needed that will send clear regulatory and economic signals to consumers and automakers that the future of personal transportation will shift to PHEVs and electric vehicles.
The recent spike in gasoline prices helped to establish that U.S. consumers will react to high price signals for gasoline by purchasing smaller, more fuel efficient vehicles. This is compounded with long-term development planning, where long commutes are designed into the built environment under the premise that consumers will not calculate this additional cost into the price they are willing to pay for a home that is further away from their work. The U.S. government should gradually phase in additional taxes to raise the floor price of gasoline and diesel to $4 per gallon. The additional revenue that is generated should be used to reduce in equal proportion other taxes that bring in revenue for the federal government, such as income taxes and payroll taxes. A positive unintended consequence of this policy would be that reducing the number of large vehicles on the road will help to reduce the safety-related worries that consumers have when they are considering purchase of their own smaller vehicles.
The government should provide a tax write-off of $2000 to any business that purchases a qualified PHEV from 2010 until 2018. Qualified PHEV's must have their battery cells certified as being manufactured in the United States.
The federal government should require all regulated utilities serving over 1,000,000 customers to provide Advanced Metering Infrastructure and charging stations to any customer that requires it by 2015, including commercial customers.
The hybrid electric vehicle emerged as part of a strategy to vastly increase the total fleet efficiency for Toyota. Increased fuel economy standards would also promote further investment in PHEV's. However, there is some danger that CAFE requirements could stimulate a market that does not yet exist if fuel prices remain low or if there is not simultaneous progress made on development of charging infrastructure. Awarding PHEV's that have a range of at least 40 miles with a mpg rating of at least 100 mpg would reward automakers for investing in this technology as part of their CAFE requirements.
Federal utility regulation should be reviewed that may prohibit utilities from owning battery packs in vehicles and adjusted so that utilities can carry customers battery packs on their books as assets. This would allow utilities to invest in battery packs and achieve a reasonable return, because utilities make profits on the basis of total assets under management rather than a high price. This would also enable utilities to undertake additional infrastructure investments such as charging stations and information for incorporated distributed storage into the grid. Allowing utility participate would also ease the consolidation of the information systems necessary to make an AMI-PHEV system efficient.
A portion of the federal highway budget should be directed to reward urban areas that promote adoption of PHEV's through investment in charging infrastructure, HOV lane policies that allow greater access to PHEV's, and parking policies or congestion-price policies that reward vehicles with electric drive-trains. Metropolitan regions with air-quality problems should be keen to adapt PHEV's.
It is not in the best economic interests of the United States to substitute oil that is purchased abroad for battery packs that are produced abroad. Also, it is not productive for the United States to invest in R&D around advanced batteries if it is not willing to support an advanced battery manufacturing industry. Therefore, some strategic thought should be given to the future raw materials flows that will be involved in choosing different battery chemistries, the long term impact that massive adoption of PHEV's will have on metals prices, and the ability to maintain a diversified (or U.S.-based source) of key materials inputs for advanced batteries being used in PHEV's.
Rather than reward the production of the finished PHEV, production tax credits should seek to reward the manufacturing and assembly of battery cells and packs in the U.S., similar to existing incentives aimed to reward production of wind and solar equipment in the U.S. This is necessary in order to build the necessary battery manufacturing capability in the United States.
A special unit should be established to grant all necessary federal environmental and regulatory permits for advanced battery producing facilities. This unit will be available to provide feedback on short notice to companies who are applying for permits. All federal permits for advanced battery production will be required to be turned around within 45 days.
In order to qualify for production tax credits, all OEM's will be required to provide take-back stations for battery packs sold in their HEV and PHEV vehicles throughout their dealer networks by 2012. By 2015 all packs should be removable and replaceable by OEM-certified replacement models. This will minimize the amount of new metals that needs to be mined or imported, maximizing the reserves of these metals that are available. It is recommended that a potential shift of subsidies from battery production to battery recycling be examined in 2012 to determine the optimal economics based on known costs of battery recycling. A vibrant advanced battery recycling industry must be established.
Gas stations should be required to provide charging stations equivalent to 20% of their fuel pump, or at least one charging station, whichever is greater. This should be done by 2015.
The U.S. does not allocate enough of its federal R&D budget to energy. When considering the magnitude of the problems the U.S. faces with energy, which is a $1.8 trillion annual market in the United States, (15% GDP) that is on par with healthcare industry. However, only $1 billion (0.1% of GDP) is spent per year on energy R&D, versus $28 billion on health. Furthermore, energy technologies that are produced in the U.S. are more likely to be exported than many healthcare related products, which are often not supported by the public medical systems of other nations.
The federal R&D budget for research in energy technologies should be increased dramatically as-is. A portion of this increase should be in recycling processes surrounding advanced batteries.
Although materials costs make up a large portion of the net cost of a lithium-ion battery cell, little research is put into new processes that could extract these materials more cost effectively. Furthermore, the global metals and mining industry invests a very small proportion of their revenues into R&D. Still, possibility for more efficient processes may exist, especially for metals that will see their net consumption grow at least 50% due to advanced batteries, such as lithium and potentially cobalt. Processes combining minerals extraction with geothermal energy production are one area where the federal government should increase their R&D expenditures.
The government should commit to spending at least $200MM per year on research and development of zinc-air battery technologies, which is still too immature to be developed for electric vehicle usage but which has potential to become commercialized before hydrogen fuel cells. Another advantage of this technology for future energy security is that unlike nickel, cobalt, or manganese, the United States has a supply of zinc that is on par with other nations. Zinc deposits are also thought to be distributed relatively evenly throughout the world, which could help to reduce global commodity power asymmetries. For reference, the price of zinc is often 1/10 the price of nickel. (London Metal Exchange, 2008)
In this scenario, liquid coal produced with CCS could be used in fuel-efficient vehicles, which would result in lifecycle GHG emissions of approximately 330 grams/mile. This is ten times the amount of CO2e that would be produced by a PHEV operating on electricity generated in a coal-fired power plant equipped with CCS (Greene, 2007). While this scenario may provide for acceptable levels of energy security, it is clearly disastrous from an environmental standpoint. Also, it would make it more difficult to transition to advanced battery technologies in the future once liquid coal made it far enough down the cost curve.
In this scenario the U.S. puts a price on GHG's. We will assume a price of a range of $20-$40 per ton of CO2e, which is the equivalent of ~$0.15 to $0.30 per gallon of gasoline. The U.S.A maintains the current level of funding for R&D and does not attempt to pick technology winners beyond the current rebate for hybrid vehicles. The result is that a pure carbon tax will have minimal effect on transportation, and will have a much greater effect on the cost of electricity first.
In this scenario the U.S. promotes consumption of PHEV's without taking any measure to ensure that production of the batteries remain in the U.S. The result is an industry with the raw materials in the battery packs being produced internationally and shipped to Asia, where the batteries are produced before they are shipped to the U.S. Therefore, most of the potential subsidies available to offset the costs of the battery packs goes beyond U.S. borders without much conversion into U.S. employment.
In this scenario the U.S.A continues to maintain a relatively low gas tax in comparison to the rest of the world, and does not enforce a cap-and-trade system for GHG's or a carbon tax. The U.S.A maintains the current level of funding for R&D and does not attempt to pick technology winners beyond the current rebate for hybrid vehicles. The result is an unclear direction for investors, which would translate to a lack of investment in developing the technologies needed for efficient and cost-effect electric vehicles. Furthermore, if all of the current investments in battery technologies and fuel cells are allowed to crash and burn it will serve as a warning that will prevent more investments in cleantech in the future.
BIOFUELS can help to reduce emissions of the overall fleet but biofuels will not replace fossil fuels in vehicles because of limitations by how much sunlight can be converted into usable biomass. Biofuels produced from algae may be the only truly scalable biofuels technology that would be able to provide a majority percentage of liquid fuels before being limited by land availability. However, it will be many years before liquid fuels can be produced cost-effectively from algae at scale, if ever. Biofuels will remain important to the aerospace industry in the long term, as electric-storage will never be the ideal technology for flight. R&D should be increased in the area of producing biodiesel and jetfuels from algae, and most significantly in the areas of algae biological engineering, controls for maximizing algae yields, and potential open ocean systems for growing and harvesting algae.
STANDARD HYBRIDS (HEV'S) provide a significant improvement in fuel economy in comparison to standard vehicles powered strictly by liquid fuels. Hybrid vehicles to date have shown an improvement of 16 to 47 percent in fuel economy in comparison to their non-hybrid counterparts. In comparison, PHEV's could reduce the consumption of liquid fuels by at least 70 percent compared with conventional cars (IEEE, 2007).
DIESEL vehicles do achieve greater fuel efficiency due to a higher energy density of the fuel. While the rest of the world chose a greater penetration of diesel, the U.S. remains almost purely upon unleaded gasoline for its light vehicle fleet, because of emissions regulations put on diesel in the 1970's. While diesel engines currently have greater fuel economy & do not have the same emissions problems that were present in the 1970's, they are also about $3,000-$4,000 more expensive and are heavier. Diesel vehicles should be supported but do not need any economic stimulus from the federal government at this point.
FUEL CELLS offer a potential hope for a long-term solution for a transition to a 100% reduction in emissions and reliance upon foreign oil. However, fuel cells are still incredibly expensive and nowhere near commercialization, despite decades of R&D invested by both the federal government and major automakers. A transition to fuel cells will require serious investment in the creation of a hydrogen infrastructure in addition to a source of electricity in order to produce the hydrogen to charge them.
The U.S. should encourage cost-effective production and consumption of PHEV's within the United States in a manner that attempts to build the core of this industry, the research and manufacturing capabilities for advanced batteries and battery-management systems, in the U.S. as well. Although we can suggest several policies that could do this in a cost-effective manner, what policies can be achieved and maintained politically over the time period necessary to seed this progress is another question. Much of these political difficulties will be managing interest group policies, with the scale of the problem being addressed reflecting the quantity and magnitude of the interest groups likely to become involved. Perhaps the greatest difficulty, if it is possible, will be in getting the U.S. public to accept higher gas prices that are propped up by a higher gas tax, even if this tax was used to offset other taxes affecting individual consumers, like income taxes, or to provide health care assistance for average Americans. In economic terms, higher fuel prices are the most efficient means of reducing fuel consumption in the long run because it also provides incentive for consumers to alter their behavior, in addition to providing an added layer of certainty for investors who are making bets on technologies that do better in higher fuel price scenarios, such as alternative fuels and PHEV technology.
Still, these political challenges provide the opportunity for true leadership. Finding a sustainable and secure means of transportation is one of the major challenges for this generation, and it will not come easy. At the highest level we do not necessarily need policies that pick battery chemistries, or even drivetrain technologies. However, it is wise to realize which technologies are left underfunded by business as usual, and to pull the correct economic levers to jumpstart research and production of those technologies when it is deemed to be appropriate for society. Furthermore, promoting PHEV production and consumption in the U.S. should be thought of as building a strategic industry, and careful thought should be given to each piece of the value chain, from the raw material stage up to the eventual recycling of the vehicle and the battery pack. With this approach and cooperation between government, automakers, utilities, and research organizations the U.S. could be a leader in PHEV and EV design and production for the next 50 years. However, an approach that is not adequately thought out could lead to either the lack of, or the offshoring of the majority of the technological developments needed to build a PHEV industry, either of which would be a tragedy.
