The worker who is 1.9 m tall and weighs 85 kg is standing with two legs and lifting the 20 kg box with two hands. Symmetric force distribution in two arms was assumed. It was assumed that the box weight was applied at the distal end of lower arm and hand link. The worker's posture is as shown in Figure 1, the feet flat on the floor.
It was supposed that the individual was flexed his shoulder to lift their upper arm to a horizontal position (Angle S = 0) as well as the elbow extension, as the shoulder flexes, so that it was horizontal in the end posture (Angle E = 0). The relationship of the two angles was 7:1 shoulder flexion/elbow extension. The equations used for shoulder and L5/S1 moment calculation are as follows. Resultant forces at elbow and shoulder did not change as elbow and shoulder were extended or flexed. The box mass of 20 kg was assumed.
Shoulder moment = (length of upper arm * resultant force at elbow +COM of upper arm * weight of upper arm) * cos(Angle S)+Elbow moment
Table 6 shows the values of shoulder and L5/S1 moment values calculated for 7 equally spaced intervals through the motion (i.e. at each 10 degrees of shoulder flexion), and the data is plotted in Figure 10. The box mass was assumed 29 kg. Note that the plots in Figure 10 show the absolute values of the moments, not resultant moments. (The resultant moments were all negative values of the same amount of corresponding value).
In calculation of moments and forces in section 1, the moment was discovered to change depending on the segment weights, segment lengths, the posture and the box weight. It was shown that not only the box weight but also the body weight affected a great amount of the force and moment for each joint and the compression and shear force at L5/S1. From the calculation of the resultant force and moment at L5/S1 in section 1, it was shown that the length and the weight of L5/S1 to shoulder resulted in the great moment at L5/S1. Also, from section 2, L5/S1 disc compression and shear forces, it was shown that the moment created by the upper body weight at L5/S1 is more than a half of that by the box, as follows.
As for posture, as shown in the calculation of moments of shoulder and L5/S1 for different angles of elbow / shoulder in section 6 (Moment of Shoulder and L5/S1 when being Flexed), the posture played an important role on the moment for each joint. It implies that the posture with extremities widely spread out to the horizontal direction might cause bigger moments at joints. In the same sense, moment is expected to be smaller for the posture with body segments closer to the center of the body in the horizontal direction. Not to mention, the moment for each joint would become smaller with the box closer to the body. The moment value will vary if the box weight is applied in different position on hands or lower arm. Therefore, if it was assumed that the worker was holding the object by embracing it in his or her arm rather than holding it with the tip of the lower arm and hand link, the value of the moments at joints would be smaller than those calculated in this report.
It was shown in Figure 10 that extremities and the box's larger deviation from the body caused greater moment created at joints. The shape of two curves in Figure 10 suggests a greater slop in changes of moments in the range of greater angle (-70 ~ -50ยบ) than in the range of smaller angle (-20 ~ 0ยบ), which approximately follows the cosine curve. It can be explained by considering the amount of the extremities' deviation from the body in the horizontal axis, which can be described with cosine functions of the angle. From the elbow moment equation used in calculation as follows, for example, the length, the center of mass, and the weight of lower arm and hand and the box weight were constant, while Angle E was the only variable, affecting elbow moment in the cosine function.
Elbow moment = (length of lower arm & hand * box weight / 2 + COM of lower arm & hand * weight of lower arm & hand) * cos(Angle E)
Overhead exertions (which are necessarily close to the body in the sagittal plane), however, are perceived as stressful, despite generating relatively lower moment values at the shoulder. It can be explained by physiological phenomena that the muscle force varies depending on the length of the muscle as well as the length of the moment arm. Even though loads handled close to the body typically produce lower joint moment values, as muscle length is not optimized, the force capacity that the muscle can produce is reduced. Since overhead exertions are likely to cause upper arm flexion and lower arm extension, their muscles are often in the situation where they are contracting or stretched, which is not in an optimized state. To produce the same amount of force (which was required with the optimized muscle length), it can be perceived as stressful. Muscle moment arm is expected to have the similar effect, too. As the moment arm becomes shorter, the greater force is required from the muscle, which can be stressful.
With the same position but different mass of the box, it was shown from Table 2 and Table 3 that, with a heavier box, the force and moment for each joint and the compression and shear force at L5/S1 were greater. It implies that lifting a heavy object can load excessive compression force which can lead to an injury. In this view, NIOSH established a recommended limit of the weight of the object lifted by a person, as called as action limit, in 1991. The action limit is 3400 N of the compression force at L5/S1. The maximum box mass not exceeding the NIOSH action limit was calculated in section 5 (Maximum Box Mass according to NIOSH). As shown in Figure 9, the maximum box mass depends on the length of the erector spinae moment arm when the posture and the body segments' weights and lengths were same. The longer the erector spinae moment arm, the greater the maximum acceptable box mass, which was predicted from the equation of F muscle as a function of E, as below.
To decrease F comp, F muscle is to be decreased. For F muscle to be decreased, from the following equation, E is to be increased.
With only 3 cm variation in the erector spinae moment arm, the maximum box mass varied from 4.7 to 15.8 kg. It emphasizes the importance of the effect of the length of moment arm.
Also, with different box mass, the center of mass of the body and the box was located differently. As shown in Table 4, the centers of mass of the body and the box for both 20 kg box and 30 kg box were located over the foot. However, within the foot, the center of mass was located nearer to the center of the foot with 20 kg box. Therefore, it can be said that the individual could achieve a balance to stand with the box for both cases. However, since the center of mass lied more toward the toe for the case of 30 kg box, it can be said that the balance of standing was less stable with 30 kg box (or more stable with 20 kg box). Even though not calculated in this report, it is possible that, with flexing upper arm and extending lower arm, the distance from the box and arms to the body increases so that the center of mass does not lie over the foot any more. This is more likely to happen with heavier box. From the center of mass in the vertical axis, the center of mass was lower with 30 kg box. It can imply that, in case when the individual was trapped by a low bump, it would be more stable with 30 kg box (heavier box). However, it cannot be true that the heavier the box is, the more stable from being trapped, when the height at which the box is held increases more than or to the point where increasing box mass only raises the vertical position of the center of mass.
Further analysis about the effect of the horizontal force component such as leaning or being supported would be interesting, because those horizontal force components would sometimes help reducing the moments at joints, and other times increase the moments at joints.
Also, in this report, analysis was done in only 2D scale. Thus, no z-axis component was considered. Based on the analysis done in this 2D scale, it is expected that, the greater the width of the body (length in z-axis), the greater the moments at joints, as the greater the deviation from the body, the greater the moments at joints.
