Materiel Services Center (MSC) plays a pivotal role in the University of Michigan Hospitals and Health Centers' (UMHHC) mission to provide excellence in patient care by meeting the medical and surgical supply needs of the clinical staff. MSC manages a 9,000 square foot warehouse where an inventory value of approximately $1.35 million is maintained and represents an inventory turnover of 24 times per year.
Materiel Services Center's periodic automatic replenishment (PAR) stocking services are utilized by approximately 210 customers within University Hospital (UH), Taubman Center (TC), Comprehensive Cancer Center (CCC) and C. S. Mott Children's and Women's Hospitals. With the imminent closing of M-Stores and the opening of the Rachel Upjohn Building, Cardiovascular Center, and the new Mott Children's Hospital and Women's Hospital, Materiel Services Center would like to re-evaluate their PAR stocking formula to ensure adequate stocking levels. Every customer is stocked on a daily basis by a Materiel Services Center stockkeeper from the warehouse on Level B2 of UH. Despite being stocked daily, some units are placing a high number of calls to MSC for depleted items. MSC responds by creating a Materiel Service Requisition (MSR) or supplemental order. An evaluation of the PAR stocking levels has been requested to reduce supplemental order requests in an effort to improve MSC efficiency and customer service.
The objective of this project is to determine the root causes for MSC's supplemental orders from units that are PAR stocked daily and to make recommendations for reducing the number of supplemental orders and improving overall PAR levels.
Materiel Services Center currently employs sixty-nine stockkeepers and runners who are responsible for PAR stocking services and filling supplemental and custom requisition orders. All carts are PAR stocked daily during first or second shift. The supplemental is that supplemental orders process requires that orders are delivered within 60 minutes of being requested 24 hours a day. If an ordered is placed stat, it is delivered within 15 minutes. Based on supplemental order data from 11/1/05 to 10/31/06, MSC fills between 67 and 576 lines per day, a daily average of 172 lines.
Interviews were conducted with MSC management and staff to gain an understanding of the current state of their operations. Process flow maps of the supplemental order process and PAR stocking process were created and validated by Materiel Services Center's employees and management (Appendix B and C). Interviews were also conducted on the receiving end of the supplemental order process with select units to validate anecdotal stories as well as to understand potential causes for supplemental orders. A fishbone diagram illustrating these causes may be reviewed in Appendix D. The fishbone diagram led to the creation of a taxonomy of supplemental order root causes, which subsequently became the basis for further observational study and data analysis.
Supplemental data from M-Pathways' Financial Operational Data Store (FinODS) was analyzed over the time period November 1, 2005 to October 31, 2006. The conclusions drawn from the data stratification led to process studies of Materiel Services Center's customer service representatives (MSC CSR) and to meetings with MSC top supplemental order customers.
A statistical analysis of the current PAR level equation was conducted to determine if it provides a sufficient level of stock to meet the demands of each unit.
The top 10 MSR customers by lines remained consistently the same when data was evaluated on a quarterly basis. The graph below summarizes the top 10 MSR customers by lines. (Lines are defined as the number of times an item is ordered by a unit regardless of the item quantity.)
The graph below illustrates the top 25 items requested from MSC through supplemental orders by quantity and their corresponding total cost.
The following three graphs show the total number of lines shipped by month, day of week, and hour of day all for the same time period, 11/1/05 through 10/31/06. Lines by month showed only slight variation and supplemental orders peak on Tuesday. Approximately 55% of all supplemental orders are placed between the hours of 8:00 AM and 2:00 P.M.
Further analysis of two of Materiel Services Center's highest supplemental callers, UMH 5DS (a surgical intensive care unit) and Mott Pod B/C (a pediatric intensive care unit), yielded the following:
Only three months of data was used when examining supplemental orders for each unit. Interviews with nursing staff from these units revealed that any unusual item usage prior to this time frame resulted in lack of recollection for any anomalies in the data. An interesting distinction between UMH 5DS and Mott Pod B/C is that Mott Pod B/C employs an "equipment technician", whose job responsibilities include reviewing the stock levels of the nutrition room and supply room for any stockouts and calling MSC as supplemental items are needed.
Nurses from both units commented that they were not sure what some of these items were based on the descriptions listed above. Another shared comment between these two units was that many of their supplemental orders were due to their highly variant patient populations and that they were requesting items to meet a particular patient's needs that they do not normally stock in their unit.
After a review of the supplemental order data in FinODS, a report was created detailing where supplemental orders were delivered and which department was charged. As a result of the manual process used by MSC CSR, billing errors became evident and they have been quantified at approximately $50,000 or 30% in of the lines in the billing report over the 12 month period between 11/1/05 and 10/31/06. The delivery location ("ShipCust" in the raw data set) and the six digit department ID number billed ("DistType") are both manually entered into FinODS which allows for typos and other errors. Appendix E provides a detailed report of the billing that occurred during this time frame. Journal entries to correct these billing errors are time consuming and costly as well as another manual process. All further analysis using this data set assumed the delivery location ("ShipCust") to be the most accurate field, as advised by the warehouse manager in Materiel Services Center.
The PAR level equation was assessed to validate whether or not it is generating a sufficient stock level for each (unit, item) combination. The current equation M-Pathways uses to generate PAR is:
where Average is the average monthly demand, Divisor is a factor corresponding to the number of times per week that the unit is stocked, and the 1.4 constant creates a safety stock of 40%. The average monthly demand is calculated as the summation of daily quantity received for an item over a year divided by twelve. Daily quantity is defined as the total amount stocked by the stockkeeper and any additional volume brought to the unit via supplemental orders. However, credits issued to a unit are not taken into consideration in this calculation, which could result in slightly inflated PAR levels. This will be rectified in early 2007, when Materiel Picking Feedback (MPF) will be introduced into the PAR calculation software by MAIS. This update will take credits into account when calculating PAR level for a (unit, item) combination.
To reduce the likelihood of stockouts, the variance of the item's daily demand should be taken into account in the PAR level equation. However, the equation currently does not do so and sets all (unit, item) combination PAR levels to be 1.4μ, where μ is the item's average daily demand (Average/Divisor). This results in a different stockout probability for each (unit, item) combination that can be approximated by using supplemental order data. A proxy for the stockout probability
By examining the PAR stocking and supplemental order data, the assumption that daily demand is normally distributed with mean, μ. Under this assumption, the optimal stocking level for a (unit, item) combination should satisfy the equation:
where μ is the item's mean demand, σ is the standard deviation of item demand, and z(α) denotes the one-sided z-statistic of the standard normal distribution corresponding to the probability of not stocking out of the item, α.
Since both Equation 1 and 2 calculate an item's daily PAR level, they can be set equal to each other. Solving for σ yields
Since it is very hard to place an exact value on the cost of stocking out, a common alternative is to use a service level in its place. Therefore, MSC can choose a Type 1 service level, the probability of not stocking out of a (unit, item) combination, that they want to achieve. When setting their service level, MSC should consider the cost of the item versus the labor cost required to deliver the item if ordered as a supplement, the cost of obsolescence if the item is left sitting on the cart, and the opportunity cost of the space that each additional item would consume. This Type 1 service level is equal to α and can be substituted into Equation 4. For example, if MSC decided upon a 99% service level, the PAR Equation would look like
This new equation will increase the PAR level for those items that have stocked out the most, causing both the number of stockouts and supplemental orders to decrease. This calculation is shown in detail in Appendix F.
Fortunately, out of the over 22,000 (unit, item) combinations, less than 500 have a probability of stock-out of 4% or greater. Please refer to Appendix G for a sample of 534 (unit, item) combinations that were stocked out at least 14 times (or 3.84% of the time) during the three-month period selected. New PAR levels for these (unit, item) combinations have been calculated.
Through observational studies and interviews, several categories of reasons for supplemental orders were identified. A taxonomy consisting of these categories was created as illustrated in Table 1.
While a few of the "whys" are stochastic random variables and out of MSC control, many are within their capacity to influence. A preliminary study of the degree to which the stockkeppers accurately inventory and stock the units was undertaken using a randomly selected nursing unit and PAR stocking order data from FinODS. However, due to the limited resources available for this project, these potential causes were not investigated long enough for any sound conclusions to be drawn. Nevertheless, by reviewing the five 'w's -- who, what, when, where, -- and how of the PAR stocking process, MSC management can determine if this is truly a contributor to the supplemental order problem.
This reason looks at why a nurse cannot find the item on his/her cart, despite the item actually being there, or after the supplemental order arrives to their unit.
After interviewing several nursing units, the reoccurring theme among all of them was the difference in nomenclature between Materiel Services Center and Nursing. Attached to each cart is a PAR list containing each item's quantity and location. However, this document lists the items by what MSC calls the item and not how the item is referred to by nursing staff. For example, the item nursing staff refers to as a cotton swab is called an "applicator, cotton tip 6in nonsterile" by Materiel Services Center.
Additionally, nursing staff have confirmed calling for supplemental items without looking in the stock room first or after taking only a cursory look. Also, clerks do not always know who ordered a supplemental item and therefore it never reaches the person who requested the item. Consequently, this often generates further supplemental calls until the item is received by the person who ordered it.
This dimension addresses supplemental orders that are a result of problems related to the pre-determined item inventory level on a cart.
PAR levels are only recalculated on an as requested basis by the PAR Maintenance Staff in Materiel Services. As discussed in Section 3 above, the current equation used to calculate an item's PAR level is:
This category investigates why a nurse manager may not keep items stocked in MSC warehouse on their carts.
Although stocked by MSC, nurse managers are responsible for the items and quantities stocked on their carts. Nurse managers must take the initiative to adjust PAR levels due to an increase in an item's usage or to add a new item to their PAR list. Consequently, the "whys" of this dimension are generally outside MSC's span of influence.
Non-Stock Item: This classification focuses on why orders are placed for items that are not stocked in the MSC warehouse.
Supplemental calls for non-stock items are unavoidable as these low volume and/or high cost items are not kept in stock in the MSC warehouse. Unless the cost-benefit of these items rises to a justifiable level for adding them as regularly stocked warehouse items, this dimension does not require further investigation.
Other observed causes for preventable supplemental calls:
Utilizing the taxonomy framework and the quantitative analysis results, the following recommendations are made to MSC management in their efforts to reduce supplemental order volume.
Work with MAIS to implement a system which forces users to select from a predefined list of delivery locations and have the corresponding department ID automatically populate. This will eliminate the need for having the CSR manually enter department IDs and reduce the potential for error. An option to override will be made available for use when necessary.
Create a committee of nursing staff and MSC staff to produce a directory of items, alphabetized by the nomenclature used by nurses that can be merged with the current PAR list on the carts. This will allow nurses to easily locate items in the stockroom. Since each stockroom layout is unique, this change will be particularly beneficial for nursing staff that float between units.
Providing more details about each item will facilitate nurses ordering the correct item the first time.
Items often end up in the stockroom when a clerk receives a supplemental order and does not know who the intended recipient is.
This will reduce the number of unnecessary supplemental orders for stocked out items.
Establish communication between stockkeepers and units. Nurse managers (or equipment technicians) can notify their stockkeeper of any unusual needs due to their patient population that day. This will result in saving their staff time later as they will no longer need to place a supplemental order.
a. Generate a trigger to notify MSC when a supplemental order is placed more than three times for a non-PAR item.
b. Generate quarterly reports of supplemental orders to determine top customers. Review reports to detect trends and abnormalities and adjust PAR as necessary.
Work with Public Relations and Marketing Communications (PRMC) to develop a brochure to educate units on services offered by MSC (e.g. ability to substock to an alternative location or bill an alternative org code) and on how to use MSC's services more effectively (communication about unit needs, encouraging nurse managers to review and update their PAR levels when necessary).
After reviewing the current PAR level equation and supplemental and PAR stocking data, it is recommended that the PAR levels are to be revised on a quarterly basis, based on the previous quarter's data. This new equation takes into account the variance of demand as well as allowing MSC to adjust the probability of stockout based on item cost or other factors such as holding or obsolescence cost.
