Technology refers to the work processes, techniques, machines and actions used to transform organizational inputs (materials, information and ideas) into outputs (products and services).
Core technology is the work process that is directly related to the organization's mission.
For an organization like Beanster's the core technology begins with the raw material (e.g., various foods, fruits and raw meat required for making food items). Employees take action on these raw materials and use to prepare various food items and thus transforming the raw material into the output that is sold to the consumers. The core work process Beanster's consists of food processing, quality assurance of the food items prepared and finally food packaging for sale to the end consumers.Non Core Technology
Non Core Technology is a department work process that is important to the organization but is not directly related to its primary mission.
For Beanster's the noncore processes are illustrated by the departments like
Technical complexity is the extent of mechanization of the manufacturing process. If a large amount of the work is automated and executed by machines, it figures on the higher levels of technical complexity. An organization employing workers who constitute the production process would figure on the lower levels. According to the classification, Beanster's would fall in the Group 1, i.e.
Beanster's operates on a small scale, catering mostly to UofM students. They manufacture and assemble small orders to meet the specific needs of customers. There is a high level of customization as most of the products are made-to-order.
Beanster's café can be classified as Product and Service firm as it exhibits characteristics of both firms to a certain extent.
The structural characteristics of Beanster's which resemble that of a Service organization are:
The structural characteristics of Beanster's which resemble that of a Product organization are:
Departments in Beanster's can be classified as consisting of a distinct technology. This part of the report analyses this nature and its relationship with the departmental structure.
The departmental activities can be classified into two dimensions; Variety and Analyzability.
An employee of Beanster's was interviewed and asked to rate on a scale of 1 to 7 the following:
Based on the findings of the survey and the information provided by the managerial entities, we can classify Beanster's according to the framework.
Beanster's figures in the 3rd quadrant with high analyzability and low variety. The departmental technologies are routine.
Job design includes the assignment of goals and tasks to be accomplished by employees
At Beanster's all the employees in various departments have been signed their jobs and boundaries clearly. They follow the policy of Job Enlargement. The workers are involved in performing boring, repetitive task and hence the policy of job rotation is implemented to give them a greater variety of task. Apart from that employees are cross trained and are well acquainted with each job so that they can fill in other's shoes in case of absentees. The managerial policy is to trigger job rotation whenever any employee starts getting too comfortable with any job. By doing this it is ensured that employees has through knowledge and skills of his existing duties and work environment and will perform efficiently in all departments. E.g. person in charge of preparing food for a week is assigned to work as a cashier for the next week so that in case that cashier is absent anytime in future the other employee will perform the task without compromising on the quality and efficiency.
It acknowledges the interaction of technical and human needs in an effective job design. The needs of the people should be combined with the organization's needs. The organization must be designed for joint optimization. It will function best only when the social and the technical systems are designed to feed the needs of one another.
As stated earlier, the Supervisor controls about 37 student workers at a time. This may result in huge amount of work pressure on the supervisor. It also leads to confusion in some circumstances. Instead, the number of supervisors can be incremented to 3 or 4 so each one has to manage a small number of workers. This will lead to improvement interaction between the workers and the supervisors. As majority of the communication is verbal, flow of information throughout the organization will be better. The workers will feel more comfortable working in such an environment. The workers will have a better sense of belonging to the organization.
