The current processes and layout of the Emergency Department (ED) at the University of Michigan Health System (UMHS) cause reports of privacy complaints. Patients have complained about the spoken exchange of information being overheard in the public reception and patient care areas. These violations can lead to breaches of privacy regulations. The risk of these violations will be reduced by improving the patient flow in the front end, which includes the check-in desk, NASA exam rooms, and the waiting room.
The Emergency Nurse Manager of the Emergency Department asked our team to observe and analyze the processes, flow, and layout of the front end in the ED to make suggestions for improvement that will result in better patient privacy. Our team completed these observations and analysis and has developed recommendations to improve patient privacy.
Most patients received in the ED enter through the main ED entrance. These patients are immediately triaged and assigned a priority level from 1 to 5 by a nurse at a podium. The patients are then directed towards the front desk where a clerk collects their personal information. In the NASA area, a nurse assesses the patient's condition. The patient is then directed to the waiting area containing approximately 43 seats with room for more than 10 wheel chairs and a desk for a unit host who is responsible for giving directions, assigning visitor passes, and addressing visitor needs. A "runway" nurse is responsible for the hourly reassessment of patients who are in the waiting room.
During the busiest hours, the waiting area is close to capacity of 43 people and the front desk area is over crowded. However, the security personnel office is enclosed and set apart, which hinders their ability to direct the patients towards their final destinations and to screen the people entering through the ED doors.
This project was performed in the following phases: observations, shadowing, interviews, quantitative data collection, researching other hospital EDs, and analysis of information.
To better understand staff roles at the hospital, the team observed the activities of the ED front end. We observed patient privacy issues, flow problems, and the waiting room capacity.
The next step completed was shadowing the nurses. Our client provided the official job descriptions for the front end nurse staff. Each member of the team followed a NASA nurse or podium nurse for two hours to understand the patient-nurse interaction.
The team interviewed key hospital staff regarding privacy and security. Within these interviews, we explored the current privacy complaints, the relevant numerical data that could quantify the privacy complaints, the possibility of collecting waiting room visitor data and the role of security.
Our team received the following quantitative data regarding the ED front end:
Our team also collected and facilitated further data collection including:
The team observed two other Emergency Departments layouts on October 9th, 2005. The two hospitals observed were St. Joseph Hospital in Ann Arbor, Michigan and St. Joseph Hospital in Saline, Michigan.
The team examined results from the observations, shadowing, interviews, quantitative data collection, and researching other hospital EDs. From this analysis of information, the team developed recommendations to improve the patient flow and privacy at the front end of the ED.
Our team acquired large amounts of data by following the above methodology. With that data we conducted studies of the privacy survey data, public relations, sound levels, visitor policy, waiting room, security, layout, and pediatric patients. The findings, conclusions, recommendations, and expected outcome for each of these eight topics are found in the table below:
The Emergency Department (ED) at the University of Michigan Health System (UMHS) has experienced over 200 patient visits a day in the last year, totaling more than 72,000 visits. In addition, the current triage, check-in, and assessment process followed in the ED had received patient privacy complaints. These complaints were due to the spoken exchange of information in the public reception and patient care areas. The legal representatives from the Privacy Office have identified the patient information collection in the ED reception area as a violation of hospital and the Joint Commission on the Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO) regulation. Consequently, the patient flow in the front end areas needed to be improved. The front end area includes the check-in desk, NASA exam rooms, and the waiting room. The purpose of this project was to improve patient privacy by observing, analyzing, and modifying the patient flow and layout of the front end. The purpose of this report is to present the methods, findings, conclusions, and recommendations from the project.
To determine a method that reduces patient privacy breaches and to improve the flow and layout of the front end area, the student team has completed the following tasks:
After observations and data gathering were completed, our team has developed recommendations to:
Most patients received in the ED enter through the main ED entrance. These patients are immediately triaged and assigned a priority level from 1 to 5 by a nurse at a podium. The patients are then directed towards the front desk where a clerk collects their personal information. In the NASA area, a nurse assesses the patient's condition. The patient is then directed to the waiting area containing approximately 100 seats and a desk for a unit host who is responsible for giving directions, assigning visitor passes, and addressing visitor needs. A "runway" nurse is responsible for the hourly reassessment of patients who are in the waiting room.
During the busiest hours, the waiting area is full and the front desk area is over crowded. However, the security personnel office is enclosed and set apart, which hinders their ability to direct the patients towards their final destinations and to screen the people entering through the ED doors.
The following key issues have led to the problem under investigation:
To improve patient privacy and flow of the front end, the team examined the activities in the Emergency Department front end. The primary parties that were involved in this project include patients, family and friends of patients, clerks, technicians, nurses, physicians, and security personnel. University Hospital departments involved in this analysis were the ED, the security department and the legal offices.
The project included analysis of:
The project excluded analysis of:
Recommendations resulting from this analysis only include changes that are manageable at this point. These types of changes include basic redesign of the reception, NASA and waiting room areas and minimal construction.
This project was performed in seven phases: observations, shadowing, interviews, quantitative data collection, analysis of information, researching other hospital EDs, and recommendations.
To better understand staff roles at the hospital, the team observed the activities of the ED front end. We observed patient privacy issues, flow problems, and the waiting room capacity. Observations were completed from September 25th, 2005 to October 2nd, 2005 during four two-hour periods. The team observations include the following:
Our client provided the official job descriptions for the front end nurse staff. Each member of the team followed a NASA nurse or podium nurse for two hours between October 2nd, 2005 and October 10th, 2005 to understand the patient-nurse interaction.
During the shadowing, we found the following issues:
To distinguish between perception and fact, our team has conducted quantitative data collection and analysis.
The team interviewed the following key hospital staff relating to privacy and security:
Within these interviews, we explored the current privacy complaints, the relevant numerical data that could quantify the privacy complaints, the possibility of collecting waiting room visitor data and the role of security.
Our coordinator extracted existing data from the Centricity Patient Information System. This data included patient arrival times from the calendar year 2004 with a sample size of 73,000 total visiting patients. We determined the arrival patterns and the times of highest patient volume in the front end from this data by using Microsoft Excel to generate a graph.
The Compliance Specialist provided the details about how privacy complaints are received through phone calls and written complaints. She also referred us to the Customer Satisfaction Analyst and the Customer Satisfaction Manager for numerical data. This data included the number of written privacy complaints and the dates on which they occurred from January 2005 through October 2005 with a total sample size of 1,756. The Customer Satisfaction office also provided the team with quantitative results from the patient satisfaction survey relating to the ED. This data was taken from January 2004 through September 2005 with a sample size of 1,874.
The Senior Architect supplied an architectural map of the entire ED in an AutoCAD diagram.
When looking at the number of people in the waiting room and the flow of the overall population, we observed that only a fraction of the volume was patients. However, the Centricity data only tracks the number of actual patients at a particular time. Therefore, we asked the Manager of ED Clerical Services to facilitate a data collection to be conducted by the unit hosts. The unit hosts in the waiting area collected the number of people in the waiting room on the hour and whether a runway nurse was present for four days from October 26th, 2005 through October 30th, 2005
The Security Officer in charge of the ED provided job descriptions and knowledge of the current activities of the two security officers in the ED. He also expressed difficulty in monitoring the performance of the security personnel. To determine the effectiveness of security in the ED, we collected data on the frequency of activities related to managing the visitor population and protecting patient privacy. This data was collected four times for two hours each over the week of October 30th, 2005 through November 5th, 2005. The goal of studying the security officers was to determine if they could take on a larger role in protecting patient privacy by directing visitor flow.
Using decibel meters, the sound levels have been measured in the widest radius around the reception desk under different conditions. This data was taken on November 12th, 2005 and was used to determine if a sound absorbing material would be beneficial in the reception area. Our team also took additional measurements of the ED front end physical dimensions on October 30th, 2005.
See Appendices A through D for the data collection forms.
The team observed two other Emergency Department layouts on October 9th, 2005. The two hospitals observed were St. Joseph Hospital in Ann Arbor, Michigan and St. Joseph Hospital in Saline, Michigan.
The team examined results from the observations, shadowing, interviews, quantitative data collection, and researching other hospital EDs. From this analysis of information, the team developed recommendations to improve the patient flow and privacy at the front end of the ED.
Our team was able to gather a large amount of data that can be classified as data regarding patient privacy and patient and visitor flow. The details of our findings, conclusions, and recommendations based on this data follows.
The following section covers the results of data related to patient privacy issues used in this project.
Our team was able to obtain privacy data including patient satisfaction survey scores as well as written comments that will be discussed below.
The following figure, Figure 1, quantifies ED patient's concern for their privacy when giving personal information from January 2004 to September 2005. The values in the figure demonstrate the level of perceived privacy and overall satisfaction with the current ED. The figure shows that mean satisfaction scores range from 78.9 to 88.9 on the scale of 0 to 100, which demonstrates patients have no complaints with the current ED in terms of their privacy.
This data was taken from the Quality Improvement Department patient satisfaction surveys. Questions are asked on a five-point scale, generally ranging from poor to excellent. Scores are reported as a converted mean where a "1" becomes a "0", "2" becomes "25", "3" becomes "50", and so on to "100". The mean values, which are displayed in the graph, are then taken from the converted score. The sample size for each month ranges from 74 to 109 with a mean of 89.
For reference, similar graphs for Ease of Giving Personal Information in the ED and ED Nurse's Concern for Privacy from the patient satisfaction surveys can be found in Appendix E. These graphs were also provided by the Quality Improvement Department.
In Appendix F are sample patient comments relating to privacy in the front end from January to October 2005 from a patient survey given to every 9th patient in the ED. We were given a sample size of 1756, yet not all comments related to the front end. Those comments that did relate to the front end are related to general privacy, reception, NASA, waiting room, security, and HIPAA violations.
The mean scores followed no monthly trend. In fact, scores fell sporadically in a 10 point range from 78-88.
The team concluded that since the mean scores never reached 90, patient perception of privacy in the front end is mediocre and needs to be improved by making changes to the front end processes and layout.
To increase the patient privacy scores to a mean of above 90, the team has further analyzed the following:
These factors to improve patient privacy will be discussed in more detail in the remainder of this section.
The ED front end currently incorporates a podium where a nurse sits to evaluate each of the incoming patients. This podium was put in place in 2003 during the SARS outbreak in an effort to reduce airborne disease contamination. We have found that the podium is ineffective in this role and that it is a root cause of the breaches in patient confidentiality.
A study was performed where 277 patients and visitors were observed walking by the podium during a total of 243 minutes. This is 1.15 people per minute, which is a significant volume of traffic in the front end of the ED. Of the people walking by, 37 or 13% asked public relation questions to the nurse stationed there. While these people were asking questions or walking by, 30 patients and visitors (11%) were checking in at the reception desk. This data demonstrates that approximately 20% of the patient and visitor population is converging at this podium and contributing to privacy breaches at any given time.
Figure 4 below, shows the frequency of the most common questions asked to the podium nurse. This data will be useful in developing signs and information pamphlets to address patient and visitor concerns.
Airborne or droplet propagated disease can travel to a three foot radius of the carrier (Center for Disease Control, Infectious Disease Fact Sheet), which at the current podium position would hit the nurse. However, it would not hit the clerks behind the desk as the desk is 36" deep.
A poll of 21 waiting visitors and patients in the waiting room found that 80% of them associated the podium with a hostess position such as at a restaurant. This association is undesirable because visitors and patients surround the podium to ask public relations questions while the nurse is listening to a patient. This crowding can result in breaches in patient confidentiality while the patient is checking in and in any possible disease propagation.
The lack of space in the reception area also confounds the ineffective use of the podium. Because the podium is positioned in the middle of the hallway, it is a constant meeting and stopping point for everyone traveling through the front end.
With the results from this data we recommend that this podium be removed from the area for the following reasons:
To prevent a build up of people at the podium, we suggest that an information station be placed in the reception area instead of the podium. The information station would serve as the central question booth of the front end. This information station would be placed in a different area to keep it away from the front desk. The specifics of the optimal location are discussed further in the layout section.
The nurse positioned at the podium would be moved behind the desk to protect him or herself from the risk of disease. Moving the nurse behind the desk will also reduce breaches in privacy as visitors will no longer have a central circular area around which to congregate. These visitors will be encouraged to go to the information desk for any public relations question they may have.
The following outcomes are expected once these recommendations are put into practice:
The following results show the sound levels in the front end and how our team used these sound levels to make conclusions and recommendations.
Patients and visitors overhearing another patient's information is one type of breach examined in this project. Auditory breaches commonly occur at the podium, check-in desk, and in NASA area. To document current sound levels during the check-in process, the team measured the sound in decibels. We stood in all four corners of the entrance area and found that the measurements were the same in these locations when there was no noise from traffic or patients. This is expected and will be used to compare sound levels when there is a higher volume of traffic in the reception area. These sound levels ranged from 56 decibels to 62 decibels.
The direction that the patient is facing when giving information affects sound levels. Table 2 shows the sound levels taken behind the patient and next to the entrance doors while the patient spoke towards the podium and the front desk.
Table 2 shows that sound levels when a patient spoke towards the podium were 3 to 4 decibels higher than when a patient spoke towards the check-in desk. These measurements vary depending on the volume of the patients' voice. The team was able to overhear patient information even when patients spoke towards the check-in desk.
The team observed activities in the NASA area and noted the potential for auditory breaches to occur. Patients standing at the check-in desk can clearly overhear conversations occurring in NASA. Other patients in the NASA waiting area can also overhear patient assessments.
Patient information given at the podium is more likely to be overheard since it has a higher sound level. This risk needs to be minimized. Auditory breaches are less likely to occur at the check-in desk. However, the chances of a breach at the check-in desk should be reduced further. The NASA area should be safeguarded for auditory breaches as well.
After observing the sound levels at various locations in the front end, the team recommends installing sound absorbing material at the reception and NASA areas in the front end. The purpose of the sound absorbing material is to improve the patient privacy and reduce the number of auditory privacy breaches by decreasing the sound level and traveling of sound when personal information is spoken.
The team recommends installing sound absorbing wall panels at the reception area. These sound absorbing wall panels should be made of acoustically absorptive fiberglass core material. The panels should be installed on the bare wall space behind the reception desk as well as the bare wall space on the sides of reception desk.
The suggested product for use is the Noise S.T.O.P. Fabrisorb™. This product is a decorative fabric wrapped, custom acoustical wall panel distributed by Acoustical Surfaces, Inc.
The team also recommends removing the podium. Auditory breaches are more likely to occur because sound levels measurements were higher when patients turned towards the podium. The sound is not contained because the podium is located away from walls and any other sound barriers.
In the NASA area, the team recommends installing sound absorbing curtain partitions for each opening to the NASA exams rooms. The recommended material for the curtains is close woven vinyl or polyester/cotton blend satin fabric with a heavy plastic fabric-like backing of Therma-Foam. Sound trapping space is created by Therma-Foam backing.
Implementing the above recommendations should result in the following improvements:
We obtained the visitor policy to determine if the policy is currently being enforced and to suggest modifications. The results of the visitor policy analysis are below.
Visitors that accompany the patients at check-in, in NASA, and in the waiting room add to the human flow in the front end. Visitor policies are used to help control the flow of visitors at these locations. Our client provided the current visitor policy and the ED visitor control document for UMHS which covers the following points:
The visitor policy and the visitor control document are included in Appendices G and H. The team observed many violations of the visitor policy in the form of too many visitors and visitors standing in close proximity to other patients. These violations occurred because no one enforced the visitor policy. Many visitors were unaware that they needed to be escorted into patient treatment areas, which proves that they have not been provided information on the policy.
The visitor policy needs to be better enforced by the staff. Nurses and clerks should only allow two visitors per patient. Visitors also need to be better educated about the visitor policy so that fewer violations occur. Fewer visitors will indirectly reduce the chances of a privacy breach. If the number of visitors is limited, fewer people will be exposed to patient information.
Our team recommends educating the visitors to reduce visitor policy violations. Nurses and clerks should distribute pamphlets with a brief summary of the visitor policy upon visitor arrival. Signs should be displayed in the waiting room and check-in areas indicating the same information that is included in the pamphlet. Additional signs stating a minimum standing distance of three feet should be implemented. The proposed pamphlet and signs are included in Appendices I through K. Nurses and clerks should also prevent patients from bringing extra visitors along by verbally enforcing the visitor policy when appropriate.
Implementing these recommendations should result in the following results:
Our team conducted a study of the number of visitors in the waiting room throughout the day to determine a trend in visitor movements through the front end. The details of this study follow.
To quantify the number of visitors to the ED, the unit clerks collected hourly counts of the total number of people in the waiting room. Figure 2 shows the average number of visitors in the waiting room during each hour and half hour of the day.
Figure 2 shows an unstable pattern for the number of visitors in the waiting room. No real trend can be established. The waiting room contains a high number of visitors between 2 and 5am, and between 2 and 9pm. The lowest number of visitors occurs between 5 and 11am.
Through observations of the front end, we saw that visitors add to the human flow in the front end by walking between the waiting room, bathroom, vending machines, and telephones. Visitors often ask questions to the nurse at the podium or the clerk behind the desk. When asking questions, visitors approach the front desk or the podium, which increases the risk of a privacy breach.
Visitor flow in the ED front end varies greatly throughout the day. These visitors add to the traffic near the front desk and the visitor flow needs to be controlled, especially during peak times.
Our team recommends that maps showing the location of the bathroom, vending machines, and telephones should be distributed in the waiting room and/or upon check-in of the patient. Visitors will then be more educated and will not ask as many questions to the nurses and clerks.
Although major architectural changes are not within the scope of this project, our team recommends that in future renovations, the waiting room should be in close proximity to the bathrooms, vending machines, and telephones. This recommendation would reduce the amount of traffic passing the front desk, which would decrease the risk of a privacy breach.
The following outcomes are expected once these recommendations are put into practice:
Throughout this study concerns with the level of involvement of security have been expressed by the front end staff as well as the ED Nurse Manager. The ED Security Supervisor has confirmed that issues have been raised between the security officers and nursing staff in the front end. These issues include:
These issues were initially out of the scope of this project, but as they apply to the volume of visitors in the front end, a small analysis of the visitors checked by security was performed.
After conducting this observational study, we found that of 49 patient arrivals, only 4% or 3 visitors were questioned by security to determine why they were coming through the ED entrance. This is observed in Figure 3 to follow.
The above findings suggest that security should have a more visible role in the front end where each visitor has an opportunity to be screened as he or she enters or exits the ED.
Educational pamphlets or maps distributed at reception could guide visitors to other entrances and exits once they have checked in. This would reduce the number of people security had to check entering the ED front doors. ED visitor stickers should also be issued to visitors upon entrance. This would identify visitors and show that they have already been screened by security, so no further checks need to be made.
After consulting with the ED Security Supervisor, we determined that further research should be completed to determine the actual activities of the two security personnel assigned to the front end. This would validate the distribution of time spent on each security activity and whether security personnel should be distributed differently in their job tasks or if more security Full Time Equivalent's (FTE's) should be added.
Implementing the above recommendations should result in the following improvements:
The following section is the results relating to patient and visitor flow issues. The recommendations will improve flow, bottlenecks, congestions, and efficiency of nurses in the ED front end.
Our team developed the current state value stream map below, Figure 5, which shows the main process steps as well as the material and information flow in the front end of the ED. Process times and wait times are included. These times were taken from the information compiled by the Emergency Department Lean Team and are a combination of data and observations.
The floor plan of the reception area was physically measured and studied to evaluate the flow of patients and visitors in this specific space.
The current dimensions and layout of the ED front end can be observed in the following figure, Figure 6. The dashed lines represent the current flow of patients and visitors as they move from check in to the waiting room to the bathroom/vending area.
The layout in Figure 6 demonstrates the flow of patients and visitors, which results in breaches in patient privacy and the large volume of questions directed to the podium nurse. The first dashed line (Line 1) traces the path patients are meant to take, from the entrance to the podium to the front desk. The second dashed line (Line 2) traces the path visitors and patients take to go to the bathroom, vending, the cafeteria, an alternate exit or to ask a question. From the waiting room they walk by the front desk and the podium to get to the hallway leading to the main hospital. By being routed this way, there is more opportunity for breaches in privacy and for the nurse to be asked a public relations question as the person walks closely by the front desk and podium.
In Figure 7, to follow, the recommended layout of the front end and the predicted patient and visitor flow is demonstrated. In this layout, the podium is removed and an information desk is added by the front door. This desk would be a greeting and information booth for all patients and visitors to the ED. Because it is immediately on the left as the patient walks in, a check can be made to restrict the entrance to only patients. Visitor passes and stickers can be given to help identify the current people in the front end and information packets with a map of ED can be given to help in the answering of future questions. This information station could be manned by a greeter position supported by FTE's from the Security Department as well as the Clerical Services department. This would be beneficial because this position could be a link between the internal unit hosts and the external security personnel and have training from both departments.
In Figure 7 below, the dashed lines demonstrate the predicted visitor and patient flow. The two dashed lines from the door(Lines 1 and 2) demonstrate that patients checking in can either go to the information desk or bypass it and still go to the reception desk. This will stop the backup of people waiting around for the podium nurse and promote single file lines to the front desk. The flow of patients and visitors to ask questions and visit other places in the hospital (Line 3) will be improved because people will know where the proper place is to ask questions and then they will be directed around the reception desk to the hallway connecting to the main hospital.
Implementing the above recommendations should result in the following improvements:
Pediatric patients are currently adding to the flow through the ED front end so our team found it necessary to quantify this flow in an effort to seek flow improvement.
The average hourly arrivals of pediatric patients versus adult patients can also be seen in Figure 8 below.
The data was extracted from the Centricity Patient Information System and included patient arrival times from calendar year for 2004 with a sample size of 73,000.
According to the Centricity data, over a third of the patients arriving in the ED are pediatric patients. Figure 8 shows a similar hourly arrival trend with a peak in the afternoon which is similar for both adult and pediatric patients. Therefore, an elimination of pediatric patients in the front end of the ED would reduce the total volume of people in the ED front end consistently throughout the entire day.
The team recommends sending pediatric patients and their visitors directly to CES after triage and check-in at reception. We recommend not assessing the pediatric patients in the NASA area with the adult patients.
The team also recommends an additional analysis on the effects of sending pediatric patients to CES for assessment. Resource constraints and increased volume effects in CES should be studied further.
The following outcomes are expected once these recommendations are put into practice:
The future state value stream map, Figure 9 to follow, maps the front end with the patient flow changes recommended by the team. These changes are the following:
To expand our background knowledge on the privacy issues and the ED layout and patient flow, we conducted literature researches. The literature research was done via World Wide Web, mostly from major search engines and the University's electronic journal database. We have found three previous studies done on the similar topic of perceived privacy issues at the ED. Results of the studies and their significance for our project are detailed below. We have also found an article that recommends several success factors for ED patient flow. This article provides eight common factors identified from successful examples of efficient patient flow implementation in the ED. We considered the below eight factors when making recommendations for the front end ED flow and layout. Please refer to the Appendix L for the citations of sources and authors.
The objective of this study was to determine the frequency of visual and auditory confidentiality and privacy breaches in a university hospital ED. This study defines privacy breaches as collection of patient information such as name, room number, diagnosis, tests, past medical history and personal information. The study found that more than 53% of patients experience privacy breaches near the triage and waiting areas. Based on the study, the authors conclude that all members of the health care team commit privacy breaches, and that the frequency of the breaches is dependent on the ED architecture and floor plan.
The results of this study are a major support to the purpose and the importance of this project. This study proves that there are significant occurrences of privacy and confidentiality issues at the triage and the waiting areas in an ED, and states the need for further research regarding the flow and layout of the ED, which are proven to affect privacy.
This study identifies the nature, severity, impact, frequency and risk factors of perceived privacy infringements at the ED. The privacy incidents are defined as breaches of medical or personal information or exposure of private body parts. The study found that 68% of patients reported a probable or definite privacy incident. Other findings were that 41% of patients overheard other conversations, while only 15% noticed that their conversation was being overheard. 11% of patients who experienced inappropriate exposure of body parts and 4% of patients reported that they withheld their information or refused examination due to fear of privacy breaches. Patients' length of stay was positively correlated to the frequency of the privacy incidents, and patients in a walled cubicle perceived fewer privacy incidents than those in absence of walls.
The results of this study support our recommendation of having sound masking material on the walls or between NASA areas, proving statistically that this measure will significantly decrease the privacy and confidentiality incidents. Also, based on the finding that the length of stay is positively correlated to the frequency of privacy incidents, we recommend a further research or an in-depth project studying methods to reduce the waiting time and improve timeliness of the patients being examined at the Emergency Department. This study also raises the issue of incorrect treatment for a patient due to incorrect information given by the patient, resulting from a fear of privacy breach.
This study determines whether the type of the room affects the occurrence of privacy issues. The privacy issues were defined as overhearing conversations from other areas. This study finds that about 36% of patients overhear the conversations with similar frequencies in walled and curtained rooms. However, the location of conversations differed between these two types. Curtained rooms allowed more conversations from adjacent rooms, while walled rooms allowed more conversations from the hallway or nursing station.
From the results of this study, we conclude that while implementing sound absorbing walls, we should also decrease the unnecessary flow through the hallway or nursing station. Walls will remove the risk of overhearing conversation in adjacent rooms but not from the hallway.
The team observed two other local hospitals to benchmark their flow and layout implementation. St. Joseph Hospital in Ann Arbor, Michigan had a layout with more space which could handle the capacity of a large volume hospital. St. Joseph in Saline, Michigan had a more effective solution to the patient privacy problems than UMHS; however, this hospital handles the smallest volume of patients among the three EDs observed. This hospital had glass cubicles with sound and visual separation panels for the patient reception area.
From the observations, shadowing, interviews, and data collection, the team conducted studies of the privacy survey data, public relations, sound levels, visitor policy, waiting room, security, layout, and pediatric patients to develop recommendations to improve patient privacy and flow in the ED front end. The following table, Table 4, summarizes the major findings, conclusions, recommendations, and expected outcomes for each of the eight topics discussed above.
To implement the recommendations discussed above, a schedule with prioritized steps of action has been developed by our team, in conjunction with our client.
The action plan has been broken down into tasks for be performed in one week, four weeks, and ten weeks. The details of this plan are below.
Within one week of receiving these recommendations the visitor signs and pamphlet should be printed and distributed throughout the ED front end. This task can be overseen by the Emergency Nurse Manager and should be given to the Manager of ED Clerical Services for future maintenance.
Also within one week, the podium position should be eliminated and the nurse should be placed behind the reception desk.
Within four weeks the proposed sound absorption materials should be ordered, delivered and installed on the reception desk walls. The sound absorbing curtains for the NASA examination rooms should also be installed. The Emergency Nurse Manager should delegate responsibility of this to maintenance personnel.
In these four weeks, the proposed layout for managing patient and visitor flow should be implemented. This implementation involves finding a usable workspace to use as the information station desk. Also, a job description for the information station position should be developed. The FTE sharing for this position between the security and clerical staff departments should be finalized. Then, training of the new position should be coordinated by Manager of ED Clerical Services and the Manager of the ED Security, with inputs from the Emergency Nurse Manager.
Further studies are recommended for evaluating the current role of security in the front end and in making mutually beneficial changes in their interaction with the ED front end staff.
Additionally, further studies are recommended to evaluate the feasibility and effects of moving pediatric patients to CES for assessement.
The overall expected impact of the implementation of the recommendations made by the team are as follows:
Increased privacy of patients and reception and NASA area; Redesign of layout at front end; Changes to patient flow, staffing roles, and procedures in the front end; Improved quality of patient care; Improved patient and employee satisfaction
