Originally, I had intended to do a lesson plan in German for students of English, but on further reflection, I decided that for this project it would be better for understanding if I tried a slightly adapted version of the lesson for students of English as a second language in America. My target age group would be high school-aged students at a beginner English-learning level, primarily because I will be teaching using the content-based method, and that is an age at which my chosen school subject, geography, is still taught and can therefore be more useful.
The goal then of this lesson is to impart some knowledge of the subject of geography to students of ESL. Students should learn and be able to use basic vocabulary involving directions and should be familiarized with the location of the different states in the US. I am planning for a class with around twenty to thirty students with several different first languages and varying degrees of beginner English skills.
The terminal objective of this lesson will be for the students to become familiar with what each of the states looks like and be able to identify them on a map. They should also be able to make statements about the location of a state alone or in relation to another state. This type of lesson is common in most American grade school systems today and will allow the students to learn more about the country in which they are now living.
Enabling objectives for the lesson will include learning directions (north, south, eastern from, western from, etc.) and practicing using exercises designed to aid in memorization of terms and locations. Students will also be expected to review the lesson as homework.
The materials involved will be handouts, power point, a blackboard, and a blank map to be filled out as homework (Appendix D). The handouts will include maps of the United States (Appendix A), a list of the different directions and their attributes (Appendix B), and an exercise involving the directions (Appendix C), while the power point will be used to supplement the handouts. I would write important phrases on the blackboard to aid the students in understanding the lesson. The blank map will be given out at the end of class, at which time the students will be told that the test in this course will include some of the aspects of the map and that they should practice by filling it out (with the help of another map if necessary).
If this is the first class, I might introduce myself and have the students each say their names in the traditional "my name is ____" format. Then I would give the first handout (Appendix A) out and go over the state names, instructing the students in the pronunciation of the harder ones. My power point would always simply be a larger replica of what I had given the students, so I would be able to demonstrate as well as answer questions using that tool.
After pointing to state names and having the students practice saying them aloud for a while, I would give out the second handout (Appendix B) and introduce the concept of directions. Once we had clearly defined each term and reviewed its uses and answered any questions, I would move on to some simple sentences involving the locations of the states. Some sample sentences might be as follows:
The students would again answer as a group, filling in the pauses when I spoke. This would be followed by a little question formation using the same verbs, such as given below:
The students would answer, then be given the chance to practice together in pairs or triplets. They would take turns asking each other questions and answering them using their new vocabulary and with the aid of the handouts. I would go around listening to the groups and helping the students when needed.
After a few minutes, I would combine the pairs and triplets into groups of four or five and give them the next handout (Appendix C). The students would be given about five minutes to go complete the handout before we would go over it as a class and again review the material. If there were enough time at the end of the class period, the students would divide into groups again for a game. I would write the following phrases on the board for reference:
Each group of students would then take turns choosing a state and giving a clue, such as, "Our state is north of Texas." Each of the other groups would get a chance to guess using the formula provided. The group that had chosen the state (let's call them Group 1) would then answer with the yes or no statement given, depending on the accuracy of the guess. If none of the other groups guessed the state on the first try, the Group 1 would give another clue. This would go on until one of the groups guessed correctly. Group 2 would then choose a new state, and the game would go on as long as time permitted.
At the end of class, the blank map (Appendix D) would be given out as homework. The students would be told to fill out the map and that aspects from it would be on the test. They would also be told to review the map because the next class period would deal more extensively with the states' names and locations.
All in all, I would say that this lesson should be very effective in teaching the students directions, and also moderately effective in imparting its secondary goal of giving them a feel for the location of the states. I know that more review of the state names and locations would be necessary to fulfill this goal, but I didn't feel that this issue could be addressed in only one class period.
I think that the lesson did cover a good range of different activities. There were whole-class work, small group and pair work, teacher talk, and student talk. The students had practice listening and producing, as well as using directions for a practical purpose and as a school subject. In conclusion, I believe that this lesson has accomplished the goals laid out for it according to the content-based method.
