Energy has historically been a challenging issue in Congress. The same holds true for the 110th Congress. The 110th Senate and House have passed separate energy bills this summer, Senate bill H.R. 6, and House bill H.R. 3221. Currently, a push for Congress to agree on a single bill, which they will then send to the President's desk, is underway. The energy bills differ in numerous areas but a alteration in the current renewable transportation fuels mandate sits at the top. The Senate, unlike the House, has passed a mandate for renewable transportation fuels in their H.R. 6 bill. The President agrees with the Senates decision on increasing in the renewable transportation fuels mandate. After four years attempting to pass an Energy bill in Congress, in 2005 the Energy Policy Act was finally passed. The Republicans held the majority in 2005 and both Representative Joe Barton (R-TX) and Senator Pete Domenici (R-NM) sponsored energy legislation. Although, pleased to pass energy legislation, there was disappointment with Democrats in their lack of effort to reduce our dependence on foreign oil and the $8 billion tax package in favor of oil and gas production.26 Barton has raised more campaign money from the oil and gas industry -- nearly $931,000 -- than from any other industry since 1989 and the oil and gas industry has been Domenici's number one campaign donor since 1989, with $570,000 in contributions.27 This year, democrats took control over the floor and energy legislation is being addressed, once more, in a more aggressive stance. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-CA) and Harry Reid (D-NV) are forcefully pushing comprehensive legislation through both the Senate and the House. Senator Bingaman (D-NM) proposed an increase in the renewable fuels standard (RFS) to 36 billion gallons until 2022 from 2005 standards of 7.5 billion gallons in 2012. There is debate over the need to increase the RFS because currently ethanol producers are already above standard production and questions about the US's ability to produce the required amount remain a concern.
The bill will benefit the environment by increasing the use of ethanol in fuel to E-85, which produces fewer exhaust emissions, reduced production of smog, decline in respiration illness associated with respiratory illness, and reduce greenhouse gas emissions by as much as 39-46% compared to gasoline.30 The bill will benefit our nations economy because ethanol can help stabilize commodity prices, provide competition, increase net farm income, boosts employment and improve the equilibrium of trade.31 The bill will improve the Nation's energy security and reduce the US's dependence on foreign oil by increasing the use of renewable transportation fuels and by reducing fuel consumption through efficiency.32
Although the Ethanol Society supports the bill they feel in order for the full success of ethanol and biofuel there needs to exist additional research and development programs, improved funding levels for the programs, continued growth of infrastructure with biofuels market. The support of the 110th Congress in expanding the biofules industry will contribute to ensuring America's future energy security.33
Petroleum Industry's may state the above are their reasons for opposing renewable fuels mandates but they also have other reasons to be concerned. The Energy Policy will repeal billions in subsidies and tax breaks given to big oil companies, and increase taxes on energy companies overseas operations. About $15 billion in tax incentives from the oil industry and will go directly to pay for new incentives to promote alternative and renewable technology and production.36 Oil executives threatened that higher taxes on oil production would lead to higher gas prices.37 It is important to point out that the oil and gas industry financially support many of the congressmen involved with this legislation such as Domenici and Barton. Even our President has strong ties to the oil and gas industry.
The environmentalists are disappointed in the Democratic pull toward environmental issues associated with the energy bill. They were aware that it would be difficult in the Senate and now they are hoping the House will pull through to address their concerns in the conference.40
