It was suggested in class that Solomon's theory of emotions spells trouble for the emotivists. If the emotivist wants to reduce ethical utterances to "mere" emotions, and emotions turn out to be judgments1 (rather than primitive feelings or something of the sort) then it seems that the emotivist has not succeeded in his reduction. However, I want to argue that this is not necessarily the case.
I will begin by looking briefly at A.J. Ayer's formulation of emotivism. On Ayer's view, to say an act is wrong is merely to express a feeling about that act: "For in saying that a certain type of action is right or wrong, I am not making any factual statement, not even a statement about my own state of mind: I am merely expressing certain moral sentiments."
So, on Ayer's theory, ethical utterances are merely expressions of emotions, not even assertions that we have those emotions. If we assume that emotions are judgments then ethical utterances are expressions of those judgments. Ethical utterances are not assertions that we have made any judgments or that we "have" any judgments. Now, I admit that I do not know what it means for an utterance to be an expression of a judgment but not an assertion of that judgment. It may be that that a judgment's expression and its assertion amount to the same thing. On Ayer's original formulation, it is easy to understand how an ethical utterance could be an expression of, but not an assertion that one has a certain feeling. Ayer tells us that ethical utterances are like cries of pain, and we can understand how a cry of pain is an expression of the feeling of pain, but not an assertion that one has the feeling of pain.3 However, this example does not have a clear parallel in the case of judgments. The expression of a judgment does not seem to be like a cry of pain, nor anything else I can think of; at least, not anything else which could be an expression but not an assertion. But, if expressions of judgments and assertions of judgments are distinct from each other, then it seems that the emotivist has a way out, because he is not saying that ethical utterances are judgments, but that they are expressions of judgments.
