Optical interferometry is a scientific technique that is based on the interference of light waves that interfere constructively and destructively due to a difference in phases. These phase differences are normally due to path length differences achieved by causing light from a single source to pass through some type of physical apparatus. In an atom interferometer the roles of matter and light are reversed; light is used to manipulate and control one or multiple "matter" beams and the wave -- particle duality of the atoms in the "matter" beam(s) is exploited with promising results. As expected, an interference pattern results and the atom interferometer can be adapted to make precision rotational measurements, thereby effectively constructing an atomic gyroscope/rotational sensor.
This paper gives a summary of the roles of Raman Transitions and the Sagnac Effect in atomic gyroscopes, cites some sources of noise in the system and techniques to minimize the noise, and highlights some of the current and future applications of atomic gyroscopes.
In an atom interferometer, a sequence of
One can adapt an atom interferometer into a rotation sensor by setting up an experimental configuration where the interferometer is rotated at a particular angular velocity. A phase shift occurs because of this rotation and is equal to
where
When the Mach -- Zehnder configuration is utilized in the atomic gyroscope the Raman transitions become beam splitters (
If only one atomic beam is used, then the Sagnac phase shift is assumed to be the result of the atoms interacting with the rotating Raman lasers and the Raman transitions are treated semiclassically. A fringe pattern is achieved by varying the optical phase of the final Raman pulse. The gyroscopic signal (number of atoms in the hyperfine ground state) is sampled at various rates and plotted vs. the rotation rate of the Raman lasers in μrads. The data is then fitted using a semiclassical model that averages over the velocity distributions within the atom beam but does not spatial averages over the beams. From the fit the Sagnac phase shift can be calculated and the corresponding rotation value can be extracted. To test the validity of the model used for fitting the data, the rotation rate of the Raman beams is measured independently using a seismometer and checked against the value given by the model used to fit the data [3].
In the experimental setup containing two atomic beams, if the beams aren't aligned perfectly spatially then position fluctuations result, which in turn induces rotational noise in the signal. Also, because lasers are used as mirrors and gratings, optical aberrations also pose a serious threat to the signal clarity. These two sources of noise coupled together are the main contributors to an atomic gyroscope's long term stability. However, many techniques have been investigated to address these noise issues and have been shown to be effective [4]. Another major source of noise is mechanical vibrations due to the electronics used to rotate the setup. These vibrations lead to random rotational and translational phase shifts within the sample and the interference signal. To minimize this type of noise, much care should be taken vibration isolation of every component of the experimental setup. Lastly, alignment techniques can be utilized to overcome the effects of earth's gravity and rotation. [3]
To date, atomic gyroscopes have been used to get high -- precision measurements of earth's rotation rate and with improvement in sensitivity, they will be able to detect any fluctuations in earth's rotation, gravity gradients, and carry out tests of general relativity. Implementation in navigation systems (gps) and inertial navigation are also plausible uses of atomic gyroscopes. NASA has various ongoing research projects that plan to investigate the behavior of atom interferometers in a gravity free environment and the viability of making an atomic gyroscope on a microchip in an effort to use atomic gyroscopes for rotation and acceleration sensors and for inertial guidance and navigation in the Earth Science and Space Science missions. The next step in atom interferometry is to minimize the de Broglie wavelength of the "atom" beam by using larger atoms or even molecules to test the limits of quantum mechanics.
