The voter model [1] is one of the simplest multi-particle dynamics that yields rich behavior. In its most basic form, it describes a situation where individuals take one of two states, +1 or −1. Following a given network of connections, a person will talk to one of his neighbors uniformly at random and adopt that neighbor's opinion. The probability of a person adopting a given opinion is thus the concentration of that opinion among his friends. There are exactly two absorbing states, corresponding to complete consensus for either opinion. Despite the crudeness of the model, it has been applied across many fields for a wide variety of purposes, often under different names. The voter model appears in physics for surface catalysis [2], in social science for opinion dynamics [3] and cultural or linguistic evolution [4], and in population genetics for neutral genetic drift [5].
A two state process in which individuals hold only one opinion is grossly unrealistic when attempting to model the spread of political opinions. People hold a spectrum of opinions on topics like abortion, the Iraq war, tax policy, foreign aid, etc. However, these opinions often sort themselves into coherent categories. A pair of democrats would likely agree about many topics by virtue of having the same political party, as would a pair of republicans. We consider this to indicate a drive for internal consistency. There is also a general desire by many people to adopt the behavior of his or her peers. This is considered a drive for conformity. It is conceivable that the interplay of these two forces can cause interesting behavior in the spread of opinions [6]. We create a network topology into which conformity and consistency are imbedded with differing strengths and study how this topology affects the voter model, with special emphasis on the time to consensus.
Let there be N individuals, each with an opinion, +1 or −1, on M issues. With probability p, an individual will select a topic and interact with another individual on the same topic. Conversely, with probability q = 1−p an individual selects two topics internally. Consistency is thus enforced with a weight q and conformity with a weight p. For a given topic, any individual is accessible from any other individual and, within a given person, any internal topic from any internal topic.
The M = 1 (or N = 1, mutatis mutandis) case is equivalent to a standard mean field. This is the simplest topology for the voter model, since a connection to random walks makes solving for many properties relatively simple [5]. See, for instance, [7]. There are N sites and only two possible states per site, so the system can be characterized at any given time by only the number of plus opinions, denoted by n. This analogy changes the problem to that of a random walker on a line. For N large enough that
This is easily integrable under the boundary condition that T(0) = T(1) = 0, giving
Using the results of the mean field, we can guess the scaling of the extinction time with respect to N, M, and p. For values of p near 1/2, the
We can use network theory to make these estimates more rigorous. An adjacency matrix element Aij denotes the probability that, having selected node i, node j will be picked to transmit its state.
A standard technique of solving the voter model on a lattice [8] can be adapted to the network approach [9]. Let the state of the voters be given by the set of all nodes,
The master equation for P(S) is the Chapman-Komolgorov equation
The fixation time for a network can be estimated by looking at the decay of the density
The time constant with which the correlations approach one should thus be proportional to the mean extinction time.
By multiplying equation (6) by
The conformity-consistency network defined by equation (4) is symmetric under exchange of any two topics and exchange of any two individuals, so we only have four distinct correlations. There is a trivial autocorrelation which is 1 for all time, a correlation rp between individuals on one topic, a correlation rq between topics within an individual, and the correlation between unconnected nodes, r2. The three remaining equations are
This can be represented by a linear equation by making the substitutions
giving the final form
The slowest time scale in the evolution of the correlations is proportional to the inverse of the smallest eigenvalue of B. In the limit of small p, matrix perturbation theory tells us that the smallest eigenvalue is p/(N −1). To first order, the time constant is proportional to MN2/p, in agreement with our earlier guess. Second order and higher terms can also be calculated, though in principle the eigenvalues are solutions to a cubic equation and therefore have a closed form.
Computer simulations have been done confirming the scaling properties we have shown and further showing that the smallest eigenvalues give the extinction time for any p. See Figure 1. In fact, the time constant appears to relate to the fixation time T by
for all explored system parameters. The reason for this constant is not known. We are attempting to understand the exact connection between the correlations and the fixation time. Other future work is to ask how adding noise affects dynamics on a weighted network and to explore the use of population genetics tools such as coalescent theory [10] in these models.
