Evge'nia Ginzburg's Journey Into the Whirlwind provides an intimate portrait of one woman's experience as a political prisoner and gives the reader insight into the broader history of that woman's time. The work also describes the lives of those close to Ginzburg throughout various points in her ordeal, and these lives vary so greatly that the extensive nature of Stalin's purges is evident. The wide range of people Ginzburg encounters suggests that the terror of the purges was both real and justified, as anyone could fall victim to arrest. Robert Thurston argues that the "Great Terror," was not nearly as widespread as we are led to believe, but Ginzburg's memoir demonstrates that ordinary people were affected, and their sufferings must not be minimized. The idea that fear was not a constant part of existence for everyone in the Soviet Union during this time is potentially true, but that does not change the fact that fear did exist and existed for good reason, as Ginzburg's story highlights the consequences that could be faced by anyone during the time of Stalin's Terror.
Ginzburg's telling of her experience is very personal and very real. She writes bluntly, sparing no horrific details. Every intimate moment is placed on display in the text, revealing the stark reality of prison life while allowing the reader to invest himself or herself in the eventual outcome. Small details throughout the text provide insight into the overall exaggeration of crimes that took place during the purges. One such moment occurs early in Ginzburg's interrogation. She is searched and then remarks, "My terrorist equipment consisted of a pair of nail scissors I happened to have in my bag."
The artfulness of the memoir is apparent in Ginzburg's frequent citation of historical events. As the work is a memoir, the historical references provide an anchor for the text overall. The timeline of the text is, in some ways, framed by the information Ginzburg and her fellow prisoners receive about the status of prominent Party members like Bukharin, Rykov, and Yezhov. The text also contains frequent footnotes, which provide the reader with additional historical information about the people and places mentioned. Major, more familiar historical events shape Ginzburg's experience and affect her emotions. She recalls, for example, the immense grief she felt at the death of Krupskaya, noting that it was the first time any of the prisoners cried after arriving at Yaroslavl.3 The prisoners clung to what information they could receive from newspapers like the Northern Worker, which Ginzburg was able to read while in prison at Yaroslavl, and thus written news stories are used to provide historical context for Ginzburg's narrative.
Literary allusions are also present throughout the text. Ginzburg includes many direct quotations from poetic works, all of which serve to provide cultural context for her experience. For Ginzburg, poetry was a means of staying sane, of finding a reason to live.4 She also found that "poetry is a common bond for everyone."
Surviving the Terror provided a backdrop against which writers could share their experiences while enacting a sort of revenge upon Stalin's regime. Upon receiving her prison sentence of ten years instead of a death sentence, Ginzburg states, "I intended to stay alive. Just to spite them. I was consumed by the desire to survive the tragedy which had befallen our Party."
Ginzburg possesses a dark, ironic humor in her writing, perhaps a testament to the spirit she must have had in order to survive eighteen years as a political prisoner. Though her situation was dire, when reflecting back on it she is able to provide insight and critique her own actions and the actions of others. In describing a prison stairwell, she notes that "The well was protected by thick wire netting so that no one might take it into his head to jump from the second floor and die on his own initiative instead of at the moment laid down by higher policy."
The artfulness of the memoir also highlights the artificiality of experience and the surreal qualities of the whole interrogation process. Ginzburg writes that it was nearly impossible to make sense of one's experience as a political prisoner, as the system itself had no rhyme or reason to it. Her personal knowledge of suffering and the fact that she survived to tell her story are the only elements grounding her sense of experience in reality. One moment of the text that is particularly telling of the randomness surrounding the Terror is Ginzburg's encounter with the older peasant woman referred to as "Grandma Nastya."
Ginzburg makes particular note of the diversity of prisoners she encounters. When she has knowledge of their eventual fates, she shares it. This serves to remind the reader that these were real people. Often, Ginzburg informs the reader of what happened to certain individuals when they are first introduced, as is the case with Garey. The memoir is not told in a strictly chronological order, as Ginzburg reflects on certain experiences and certain people when she first mentions them. The reader knows that she spends two years at Yaroslavl from the outset, before she goes into any detail of that experience. This technique ensures that the reader will remember the outcomes, for it is one's final fate which was most important during this time period. Whether one lived or died is a crucial element for Ginzburg's portrayal of her fellow prisoners and others she encounters. This focus on what actually happened to people in the end lends a sense of humanity to the statistics concerning the number who died, providing faces and giving the reader a more intimate sense of history.
Another way in which Ginzburg successfully narrates history is in her description of the labor camps. The labor camp hierarchy usually gave preference to ordinary criminals, who often had a greater chance to obtain better jobs.10 This is a fact Ginzburg notes in her memoir, as she remarks that political prisoners were considered the lowest of all. "The camp population was divided by the devilish ingenuity of our torturers into numerous 'classes.'"
Ginzburg also showcases the speed with which the tide could turn on those living in this time period. Her own experience is evident of this, as one day she was a respected Party member and the next she was dismissed and arrested. In addition, Ginzburg encounters many people whose luck would eventually run out, like Popov of the Butyrki prison. "Before two of three months were out, he had ceased to be the governor of the jail and became one of its inmates."
Robert Thurston argues that pervasive fear was not commonplace during the time of the purges. The majority of Soviet citizens did not live in constant dread of sudden and inexplicable arrest. Thurston cites several people, including one whose father was arrested, as stating they felt that life continued as normal during the late 1930s.14 In some ways, this was probably true, as even Ginzburg suggests early on in her memoir. She herself did not fear arrest before she was arrested, although as a Party member she was affected by the death of Kirov. She feels as though the horrors of that December first follow her from then on, connecting her experience directly to Kirov's murder.15 In contrast, Thurston argues that "The fear that resulted from Kirov's murder was probably more genuine anxiety regarding enemies than apprehension vis-à-vis the state."
It can be determined, then, that fear was more widespread among certain groups, including Party members, the military, and intellectuals.18 Especially in the case of the Party members, however, it would have made little sense for them to live in such a way that suggested their fear. Ginzburg notes that free Party members could not stand up to Stalin but were instead forced to bide their time and remain inconspicuous. One of Ginzburg's fellow prisoners speaks to the rationality of this inaction – "A time will come for them to speak out, but why should they put their heads into the noose now when it won't do any good?"
The historical record suggests that most Soviet citizens did not feel the frequent arrests and executions were completely unwarranted.22 Many observers "felt there must be some substance to [the] charges."
There was some doubt surrounding the legitimacy of the show trials, as it was difficult for people to fully accept the testimony given at court.26 The court records themselves were limited to confessions and witness testimony, not hard evidence, which calls into question the overall legality of the process.27 At the same time, "even if a person recognized that some injustice was occurring, that did not necessarily shake the conviction that enemies had to be rooted out.28 Even if the government did sometimes arrest innocents, as was understood and somewhat anticipated, their efforts in general supported Soviet security. Thurston argues, however, that it makes little sense for a government to arrest innocent, loyal people, even in the name of preserving the state.29 This is something Ginzburg notes as well, and her struggle to come to terms with her own arrest is present throughout her memoir. Based on Ginzburg's experiences and thoughts and those of others she depicts, it is possible to conclude that many prisoners were not able to figure out why they had been arrested or what the larger purpose of the purges was. These personal experiences shed light on what was clearly a very confusing period to live through.
Thurston is critical of memoirs, however, saying they "must be used with great caution."
Ginzburg's memoir focuses on the experience of life as a political prisoner, but her remarks about the arbitrary nature of arrest and sentencing suggest that fear was justified, even if it did not exist to the extent that is commonly portrayed. Fear was not necessarily widespread, or, if it was, it was not felt before 1937.33 This is a reality repeatedly confirmed by Thurston, but it is also something suggested by Ginzburg. The fact remains, however, that fear need not be widespread in order to exist in some form. Just because they may not have lived in constant fear does not mean that the Soviet people did not suffer during this period.34 A sense of suffering, then, is the most important piece to take away both from Ginzburg's memoir and from this historical moment in general. The purges represent one of the worst examples of human suffering, and Ginzburg's memoir serves to put a face on that suffering. It can be determined that the purges did instill terror into the Soviet citizenry, and if they did not feel this fear constantly they at least suffered to a great extent, whether that suffering was economic, social, or emotional.35
The question of whether fear was a constant companion to all Soviet people during the late 1930s does not lend insight into what really occurred during this historical moment. The important element of this time period is not that fear was widespread, but rather that fear existed because of a real threat posed by Stalin's regime. In the end, the result of the purges, no matter the hysteria surrounding them, is that 700,000 were shot, ten to twelve million died in camps, and critical Soviet groups were decimated.36
