The case of Lawrence v Texas is considered to be a landmark case for gay-rights activists. Decided in 2003, Lawrence was the first Supreme Court case to rule in favor of same-sex rights. Stemming from a 6-3 majority, Justice Kennedy methodically crafted the opinion for the Court. The opinion was surprisingly based on due process and privacy rather than equal protection. This logic confused legal scholars many of whom believed that Lawrence was an obvious equal protection case. The Lawrence opinion was a unique opinion for the Court since it violated many unwritten rules: first, Justice Kennedy described homosexual relationships as being a fundamental right, but he never clearly stated that they were; second, Kennedy never clearly stated which standard of review he had used and consequently allowed lower courts to interpret Lawrence how they please; lastly, the Court legalized a defining act (sodomy) which criminalized a whole class and affected the social perception of homosexuals. These unusual characteristics in Lawrence show that this case was groundbreaking. The language that Kennedy used in the Lawrence majority is probably as important as the case itself. The Lawrence decision was decided correctly; however, the narrow ruling in the case, along with equivocal wording, did not advance gay rights as much as people had hoped.
Since heterosexual couples have the power to marry granted by the state, and if homosexual couples deserve the same respect and dignity from the state, it could be argued that homosexuals should have the ability to marry. Some scholars claim that Kennedy wanted his ruling to be broader, but he would not have kept the majority if his opinion included same-sex marriage rights. As a result, Kennedy vaguely describes the Court's feelings on same-sex marriage, perhaps hoping that lower courts will adopt these rights for homosexuals. After the Lawrence ruling, some lower Courts have followed Kennedy's wishes and others have not. Since Kennedy wrote a vague, narrow ruling, lower courts have interpreted this opinion in different ways. The holding permits homosexual adults who, "may choose to enter upon this [homosexual] relationship in the confines of their homes and their own private lives" (Lawrence 4) and allows homosexuals to have private consensual sex only when "absent injury to a person or abuse of an institution the law protects" (Lawrence 4) is evident.
Kennedy derives the right to have a homosexual relationship on the bases of privacy and not on the bases of homosexuals being equal to heterosexuals. The Lawrence opinion cites two major Supreme Court decisions, Griswold v Connecticut and Eisenstadt v Baird, as its legal premises, "one of the questions on which the Court granted certiorari was whether the Texas statute violated the rights to liberty and privacy "
The language of Lawrence (or lack thereof) provides an interesting analysis of a case that pits future equality against the nation's conservative mentality. The discussion of liberty in Lawrence is completely different than the discussion of liberty in Planned Parenthood v Casey. Also, the lack of a definitive statement for a fundamental right of same-sex couples allows lower courts to interpret the Lawrence decision how they would like to. Kennedy begins Lawrence by saying that, "liberty protects the person from unwarranted government intrusions into a dwelling or other private places" (Lawrence 1). However, in Casey, Kennedy along with O'Connor and Souter (all three were in the majority for both cases) described liberty as a structure of autonomy, "at the heart of liberty is the right to define one's own concept of existence, of meaning, of the universe, and of the mystery of human life. Beliefs about these matters could not define the attributes of personhood were they formed under compulsion of the State" (Lawrence 18). The two different definitions of liberty illustrate the two different states of mind of the Justices. The narrow holding in Lawrence is evident with Columbia Law School Professor Katherine M. Franke, "[Kennedy's] reasoning depicts a more confined conception of liberty" (1402). Along with the limitations that Kennedy describes about the liberty for same-sex couples, he creates uncertainty by not clearly stating the basis of review that the Court used, "one aspect of Lawrence [sic] that was bound to draw criticism and is likely to generate confusion...is the absence of any explicit statement in the majority opinion about the standard of review the Court employed to assess the constitutionality of the law at issue" (Tribe 7). This confusion leads to lower courts essentially deciding what standard they want to use and implementing the law using their own interpretation.
The only rights Lawrence provides homosexuals are the protection from the government from intruding in their private lives. The holding states, "the Texas statue furthers no legitimate state interest which can justify its intrusion into the personal and private life of the individual" (Lawrence 11). The state does not have a legitimate interest in prohibiting private, consenting homosexual conduct. The importance of Kennedy's language in the holding implies that he believes the rational-basis test should be used to determine if laws against homosexual relationships further a legitimate state interest. He finds that they do not. Since Lawrence is evaluated with the rational basis test (the lowest level of scrutiny applied by the courts) and not with strict scrutiny (the highest level applied by the courts), Kennedy, by default, determines that Lawrence's rights in question are not fundamental. This being the case, it is easier for future courts to rule that the government only needs to meet the rational basis test in order for their laws to be upheld. This sets up future rulings about homosexual conduct and gay marriage which significantly impact the ability for Lawrence in order to provide a gateway for social change.
Many cases were impacted by Lawrence, but not all of them were impacted in a positive way. In the case Limon v Kansas, Kennedy's intended ruling in Lawrence is (purposefully) misinterpreted. Matthew Limon, an eighteen-year-old man, had been convicted of having oral sex with a fourteen-year-old boy in a school which they both attended. Kansas law punished homosexual sex with a minor more harshly than heterosexual sex with a minor before Lawrence. After the Lawrence ruling, the Supreme Court told the Kansas court to reconsider its decision. But the Kansas court reaffirmed its decision on the premise that Lawrence said, "all adults may legally engage in private consensual sexual practices common to a homosexual lifestyle" (Limon 83). Thus, Lawrence had no application to the case since it was not between two adults. Furthermore, the Kansas court noted that preference can be given to heterosexual couples because "throughout history, governments have extolled the virtues of procreation as a way to furnish new workers, soldiers, and other useful members of society" (Limon 85). The argument that homosexual couples cannot procreate is a tactic which most anti-same-sex marriage supporters use. This argument, albeit a marriage being more than just procreation, is still common and has been found in the courts. As follows, Standhardt v Arizona, a case decided after Lawrence, upholds a law against same-sex marriage. The Arizona Supreme Court held that, "the [Lawrence] Court applied without explanation the rational basis test, rather than the strict scrutiny review" (Standhardt 4). The Arizona court found that prohibiting same-sex marriage did legitimately protect a state interest. Specifically, the state interest at stake was preserving the connection between marriage and encouraging procreation, an event which is not possible between two members of the same sex. Standhardt also reinforces its ruling by quoting "absent injury to a person or abuse of an institution the law protects. It therefore follows that the Court did not intend by its comments to address same-sex marriages" (Standhardt 4). The Arizona Supreme Court took Kennedy's language in Lawrence to mean that "abuse of an institution the law protects" means the institution of marriage -- arguably the most sacred institution in America. This is proof that Lawrence does not constitute the allowing of same-sex marriage but only the privacy and respect for homosexual acts in the home.
One landmark case that was pro same-sex marriage was Goodridge v Department of Public Health in Massachusetts. Goodridge, argued just months after the Lawrence decision, finally followed Kennedy's intent. The Massachusetts Supreme Court ruled that the federal government left the question of whether homosexual couples could marry or not up to the states. And Massachusetts, somewhat mocking the Supreme Court, says "the Massachusetts Constitution is, if anything, more protective of individual liberty and equality than the Federal Constitution; it may demand broader protection for fundamental rights; and it is less tolerant of government intrusion into the protected spheres of private life" (Goodridge 4). The Massachusetts Supreme Court interpreted Lawrence as an opinion which left the question of same-sex marriage open for the states to decide in favor of, as long as the states respected homosexual couples. Massachusetts granted the ability to marry to homosexual couples because it inferred that being in a homosexual relationship was a fundamental right which the state must protect.
One tool for social change is the dissenting opinion. Justice Stevens' dissent in Bowers was referenced in the majority in Lawrence, and in response to the majority in Lawrence, Justice Scalia writes a scathing dissent. Scalia is concerned that the majority opinion will lead to a legal path for same-sex marriage. Scalia, in his dissent, argues, "[Lawrence] dismantles the structure of constitutional law that has permitted a distinction to be made between heterosexual and homosexual unions, insofar as formal recognition in marriage is concerned" (Lawrence 16). The Lawrence decision did not address equal protection for two reasons. First, in order for the Court to overturn Bowers, it had to evaluate Lawrence on the same basis as Bowers was decided. Bowers was not decided on terms of equal protection but rather the legality of the state being able to intrude on a personal and intimate conduct in the home. This is what Lawrence specifically addresses and is thus able to overturn Bowers. Second, if the Court were to evaluate the case on grounds of equal protection, it would allow states to create alternate legislation in order to make sodomy illegal for both same-sex and different-sex partners. This empowerment would create a problem because potentially only same-sex participants would be charged with sodomy. If not evaluated on equal protection, the Court is able to outlaw sodomy laws altogether. This being the case, the Court did not say that same-sex couples are equal to different-sex couples under the constitution. The ruling allows same-sex couples to privately and respectfully engage in sodomy in their home.
Scalia also uses a slippery-slope argument in his dissent to say that Lawrence would require the state to overturn laws against bigamy and polygamy if same-sex marriage were to be legalized. This is a difficult statement to analyze since it is not based on any type of actual law or precedent. Even if a petitioner were to argue that Standhardt was ruled on the basis of same-sex couples being unable to procreate, the petitioner would have a hard time arguing that this is the only basis needed for marriage. In Standhardt, procreation was one of the main reasons Arizona denied the petitioner a right to marry; it was not the only reason. The courts would probably find that there is longstanding history and tradition in the United States of only being married to one person at a given time. In addition to judicial precedent not overturning laws against bigamy, a federal constitutional amendment could, hypothetically, be written to say: Any marriage is legal as long as it is only to one person, same-sex or different-sex, at a given time. This would legalize gay marriage, but also prevent bigamy. Since it is a constitutional amendment it is not up for judicial review and therefore would stand as good law. Without any type of precedent to base this claim, it is extremely difficult to logically conclude what would happen.
The language Kennedy used in Lawrence has the ability to bring about social change. " "
In Alaska and Hawaii, the high courts in both states ruled that same-sex couples should have the right to marry. After these rulings came out, legislatures responded to their constituents in both states and passed constitutional amendments nullifying the decisions. This type of backlash is not uncommon for an issue that has many negative connotations associated with it since an issue "of homosexual rights may elicit passionate opposition because of its relation to deep-seated religious, social, and moral beliefs" (Butcher 1426). The impact of social change depends greatly on the political culture of a state. The political culture in Alaska and Hawaii vehemently opposed same-sex marriage, and even though Lawrence provided homosexuals with some rights, it was not enough. But the political culture in Vermont and Massachusetts was more tolerant of gay rights and accepted the decision in Lawrence. The legislatures in Vermont, understanding that gay rights were now expanded under Lawrence, took action to create the nation's first civil union law. And, Massachusetts' Supreme Court ruled that a ban on same-sex marriage was unconstitutional in Goodridge.
Some scholars argue that "it is conceivable that the Court chose the more limited Due Process Clause to avoid provoking political backlash" (Butcher 1428). Lawrence was written to overturn Bowers which was probably the most important part of the case, "the Court's decision to...overrule Bowers eliminated what was perhaps the most significant impediment to homosexuals: the criminalization of a definitive behavior of the class" (Butcher 1428). The Justices understood that by allowing homosexual conduct to remain illegal, it would only further the problem of integrating a homosexual lifestyle into a normal lifestyle. Whether it be trying to obtain employment, housing, or acceptance into any group, having sodomy laws criminalizes homosexuals and defines them by an illegal act. Justice O'Connor commented in her concurring opinion in Lawrence that "brand[ing] all homosexuals as criminals, [sodomy laws] thereby mak[e] it more difficult for homosexuals to be treated in the same manner as everyone else" (Lawrence 23). The Supreme Court needed to craft an opinion in Lawrence to try and change the social perception towards homosexuals, and this was what they did.
Because Lawrence is a milestone opinion for a new generation, the influence it will have in the future is difficult to measure. Unlike Brown v Board, which was a milestone decision that ultimately put an end to racial segregation in schools, Lawrence v Texas is a decision that will only begin to end homosexual discrimination. The Supreme Court in Lawrence was not able to terminate discrimination against homosexuals, to allow them to marry in every state, or to create equal opportunities for them when applying for housing. But the Supreme Court was able to overturn hundreds of years of laws that make homosexual conduct a crime and a shame. Future Courts will have greater ability to bring about social change because of to the majority in Lawrence.
