This paper will demonstrate that Locke's social contract is not necessarily a linear process moving from a) the state of nature to b) an intermediate propertied society to c) the contract establishing government. That an intermediate propertied society is not a necessary step in Locke's theory suggests that interpretations should not read the temporality of the movement between the state of nature, the commonwealth, and the contract establishing government as a historical-material process, wherein the rise of property is an essential step in the movement from the state of nature to the commonwealth. Instead, I suggest that Locke is appealing to a different sort of developmental process, the process through which a (17th century, English) boy becomes a man.
This interpretation of the Second Treatise provides further textual support to the substantial historical arguments for Locke as a radical hoping to incite and support a revolution (Ashcraft, 1980). Locke's central concern in the first half of the Second Treatise is not the exposition of a multi-step contractual process that will lead to the right to revolt in the second half. Locke's central concern in the first half of the Second Treatise is the construction of an argument dependent on property as a natural right (where alienable possessions are possible but not necessary in the state of nature) and on a particular (and false) construction of the family that, once combined with the second half, will provoke and incite revolution.
Locke's state of nature is that which he constructs in opposition to civil society, in order to define the means and ends of a commonwealth, to legitimize certain sorts of government and de-legitimize others. The theoretical implications of Locke's state of nature should not be equated with Hobbes's state of nature, or Rousseau's for that matter -- Locke's state of nature is very much his own, dependent upon Locke's particular conception of legitimate government, civil society, and Protestant theology. Locke's describes the state of nature as that "state all men are naturally in... that is, a state of perfect freedom to order their actions, and dispose of their possessions and persons, as they think fit, within the bounds of the law of nature, without asking leave, or depending upon the will of any other man" (ST, 8).
The state of nature is "also of equality, wherein all the power and jurisdiction is reciprocal, no one having more than another" (ST, 8). This equality, which is part of what it is to be a man among men -- where likeness in species indicates equality under God, and all, of course, is eternally under God -- is apparent through reason, which is the law of nature. Locke writes, "the state of nature has a law of nature of nature to govern it, which obliges every one: and reason, which is that law..." (ST, 9). Here, it is important to note that Locke's theology claims that reason and scripture produce the same conclusions, that reason is, in a manner, a form of divine revelation.
According to Locke, man is not created for the use of other men, as lower creatures are created for the use of men, but are created by God for God; knowing this truth, a second truth can be derived, that man is "bound to preserve himself" as well as "the rest of mankind" (ST, 9). Reason therefore provides man with the knowledge "that being all equal and independent, no one ought to harm another in his life, health, liberty, or possessions" (ST, 9). The law of nature, than, gives every man the rights to execute and enforce the law through punishment, defined by Locke as a means of restraint (prevention) and of reparation (ST, 11). Men, however, are self-interested, partial, and ill-natured, and so are not proper executors of the law when they are the victim of those who deviate from the law: "therefore God hath certainly appointed government to restrain the partiality and violence of men" (ST, 12).
The desire for a common authority to appeal to for punishment is more fully developed with Locke's explication of the "state of war." When one man uses force to enslave another -- enslavement defined as getting a man into another's power -- the two men enter a "state of war." This state of war can occur in the state of nature or in civil society (ST, 15). It is after the state of war has ended (the use of force has ceased) that the need for a common authority for which to appeal is required, to protect the "innocent" from further injury and compensate the "innocent" for past injuries.
Laws arise from the desire to deal in an impartial manner with injuries among members in the community, and injuries against the community from without, foreign aggression for example. The need for such laws thus gives rise to "the legislative and executive power of civil society, which is to judge by standing laws, how far offences are to be punish... [and] how far injuries from without are to be vindicated; and in both these to employ all the force of all the members" (ST, 47).
The laws of civil society therefore exist only to protect "liberty," that is, "to be free from restraint and the violence of others" (ST, 32). The occasion of government and civil society, then, is the consent of all individuals to turn over their natural rights to administer and execute the natural law to a communal authority for the protection of their liberty. Impartial laws (and their impartial execution) are, therefore, the only reason why people would want to quit the state of nature, the only government to which "reasonable" people would consent, and thus also the only legitimate basis of government.
At this point in my interpretation of Locke, I diverge significantly from the common interpretation that emphasizes the importance of property in creating the need for laws and impartial judges. While Locke's theory of property, which begins with labor, is fairly straightforward,1 I do not agree with a common interpretation that understands Locke's conception of property as a necessary intermediate step to move between the state of nature and civil society. This interpretation understands the move from the state of nature to the state of government as a historical process that proceeds through an intermediate society defined by a majority consent to the private division of common goods and various sorts of "proto-governments." Although it involves a lengthy quotation, I here include a passage that is used to support this interpretation, so that I might demonstrate how this interpretation is not a necessary interpretation:
According to the interpretation with which I take issue, man starts in the state of nature, then labour ("in the beginning") gives rise to property. As man develops and privatizes the land, there is a first compact (prior to the second compact which legitimates the commonwealth) in which men give up "their natural common right," that is, their right to all potential property in order to secure their own property. This state of society is marked by the prevalence of private property, money, and informal communities, and various sorts of proto-governments, but not the legitimate government of a commonwealth that requires the explicit consent of the majority.
The above passage is not intended as a segue between the state of nature and commonwealths (or commonwealths with governments); rather, the above passage is the story of the rise of property, the importance of labour in property, and, ultimately, part of Locke's larger argument regarding private rights to property, where property rights are intertwined with an individual's right to his own body so that both might be conflated under the name "property" and engaged in argument against arbitrary monarchal rule.2 However, the larger argument in this latter interpretation is not necessary to demonstrate the invalidity of the previous interpretation -- it is sufficient, at this moment, to recognize that the above passage is only the story of property and not part of the larger narrative of the transition from the state of nature to commonwealths or commonwealths with government.
The interpretation with which I take issue claims that the existence of property and money is itself a movement away from the state of nature and indicative of some intermediate "state" of society, as the recognition of private property indicates the existence of a commonwealth. In so far that the above passage is a transition between Locke's basis of differentiation (how private possessions are made practicable in different "states"), it indicates a transition in "states" (state of nature, commonwealths, and commonwealths with governments). For example, when Locke discusses in the above passage how "several communities... by laws within themselves regulated the properties of the private men of their society, and so, by compact and agreement, settled the property which labour and industry began," he is referring to a commonwealth with a government, not some intermediate state between nature and government. According to Locke's definition of government, private possessions are made practicable in commonwealths with governments, not by tacit consent, but by law and positive constitutions ("for in governments, the laws regulate the right of property, and the possessions of land is determined by positive constitutions,"
Locke is not signally in the above passage that certain "states" are commonwealths with governments, and certain "states" are not, and of those "states" that are not, what, then, exactly they are. I suggest that there are two related reasons for the absence of such signaling, an absence which could be (I argue misinterpreted) as implicating property as a necessary step in the movement between "states." First, the above passage precedes Locke's detailed discussion of the establishment of civil society and government. Second, the above passage is primarily the story of property, which is itself a different story than the story of civil society and government. What is important to Locke's theoretical conclusions -- and why the story of property can precede and be differentiated from the story of civil society -- is that property can exist in Locke's state of nature and thus be a natural right. That property can exist in the state of nature in no way indicates that it is a necessary step between the state of nature and civil society and/or government.
The interpretation that emphasizes the role of property and suggests an intermediate state between nature and commonwealth often cites Locke's Chapter IX, "Of the Ends of Political Society and Government" for textual support, or other similar citations (Locke repeats this claim throughout the Second Treatise). Here, Locke writes, "The great and chief end, therefore, of men's uniting into common-wealths, and putting themselves under government, is the preservation of their property" (ST, 66). Construing this quote as referring to a particular sort of alienable property, such as "goods,"
Locke's conception of property is not simply this alienable property, but a combination of alienable property, a man's life, and a man's right to dispose of his property and life as he sees fit (his liberty). The state of nature, it will be remembered, is men's "perfect freedom to order their actions, and dispose of their possessions and persons, as they think fit, within the bounds of the law of nature, without asking leave, or depending upon the will of any other man" (ST, 8). This "perfect freedom" is also "the first power, viz. of doing whatsoever he thought for the preservation of himself, and the rest of mankind" (ST, 67). As man's life is dependent upon his continued possession of his alienable property and his continued ability to dispose of his alienable property as he sees fit, Locke's "property" should be understood as encompassing men's life and liberty, in addition to men's alienable property.
Not only does this expansive interpretation of property fit coherently within the text as a whole, Locke explicitly defines property in such a way on multiple occasions. For example, in chapter VII, "Of Political or Civil Society," Locke writes, "Man being born, as has been proved, with a title to perfect freedom... hath by nature a power, not only to preserve his property, that is, is life, liberty, and estate..." (SI, 46). And in Chapter IX, "Of the Ends of Political Society and Government," immediately prior to writing, "The great and chief end, therefore of mens uniting into common-wealths, and putting themselves under government, is the preservation of their property," Locke writes, "it is not without reason, that he seeks out, and is willing to join in society with others, who are already united, or have a mind to unite, for the mutual preservation of their lives, liberties, and estates, which I call by the general name, property" (SI, 66). 3 And in Chapter XV, "Of Paternal, Political, and Despotical Power," where it would seem natural to assume a more restrictive definition of property, Locke is careful to let his reader know what, to him, is understood by property: "Nature gives the first of these, viz. paternal power to parents for the benefit of their children during their minority, to supply their want of ability, and understanding how to manage their property. (By property I must be understood here, as in other places, to mean that property which men have in their persons, as well as goods)" (SI, 90).
One reason Locke's conception of property has not been interpreted in this expansive manner might in part be due to an understandable confusion surrounding the passage in Chapter XI, "On the Extent of the Legislative Power." In paragraph 138, Locke writes,
Here, it would be easy to conflate "goods" with "property," particularly in light of Locke's phrase, "without this they have no property at all." It should be emphasized, however, that this passage is preceded with, "The supreme power cannot take from any man any part of his property without his own consent..."; we must note that Locke writes "any part," and the passage which follows is, I argue, best interpreted as a discussion of the taking or not taking of a specific part of Locke's expansive property, e.g., "goods." One need only have the barest understanding of the context in which Locke was writing to understand why he would have a passage (that continues through the next several paragraphs) where he discusses the specific case of "goods" as compatible with that which he discussed under the "general name, property."
Rather than equating "goods" with property, I suggest that this passage and the paragraph which contains it best be understood as the following argument: if men enter into society for the preservation of property (here, meaning life, liberty, and estate), than prior to society men have property, so therefore men's right to their property is such that, in order to be alienated from any aspect of their property in society, they must consent to give up that right. Therefore, taking men's goods (goods falling under the general category of property) without men's consent is violating their right to property; and if my right to (any) property is violated (in any manner), then I have no such right of property -- "I truly have no property."
This differentiation between alienable property and an expansive, Lockean property for which I have been arguing has three important implications. One, in so far that we use Locke's expansive definition of property, an intermediate state of property is not required prior to origins of commonwealths and legitimate governments. In other words, society is not required to move through some historical-material process that in turn dictates society's political position, where a restricted form of property (alienable "goods,"
In Locke's formation, conjugal society is like political society. Not only is conjugal society not within the chapter on paternal power, but conjugal society is the subject with which Locke begins the chapter "Of Political and Civil Society." Yet the textual evidence is not limited to chapter divisions. For example, Locke writes,
Conjugal society is made by a voluntary compact between man and woman; and tho' it consist chiefly in such a communion and right in one another's bodies as is necessary to its chief end, procreation; yet it draws with it mutual support and assistance, and communion of interests too, as necessary not only to unite their care and affection, but also necessary to their common off-spring, who have a right to be nourished, and maintained by them, till they are able to provide for themselves. (ST, 43)
While Locke acknowledges that "it consist chiefly in such a communion and right in one another's bodies as is necessary to its chief end, procreation," its "chief" purpose is a parenthetical that Locke quickly brushes aside. Instead of focusing on its "chief" end, Locke focuses on conjugal society's attributes that demonstrate its similarity to political society: its origins in a "voluntary compact" between relative equals, "mutual support and assistance" (where "mutual" further emphasizes a relative equality), and a "communion of interests" that include common off-spring (evoking Lockean property). Locke also writes,
As in the earlier quote, this comparison of conjugal and political society pays little attention to the reality of the situation. Marriage certainly did not involve a voluntary compact and relative equality ("the husband no more power over her life than she has over his" and the husband's power is "so far from that of an absolute monarch"). The implausibility of this portrait of conjugal society only reinforces the interpretative point, that is, Locke is straining to associate conjugal society with political society and thus reinforce (yes, reinforce) his comparison between paternal society and monarchy (or despotism).
Locke is creating this dichotomy with paternal society and monarchy on one side, and conjugal society and "legitimate" political society on the other, to make a claim about what England says it is, what England in fact is, and what England should be. Monarchy can claim to be a benign and protective paternal power, but paternal power's legitimacy is temporally bounded by the development of both the state and the individual. Membership in Locke's commonwealth presumes equality which is in turn dependent upon rationality. Most individuals are in fact excluded from membership in the commonwealth under this criteria. "Lunatics and idiots" will always remain under paternal power (ST, 34). We might also safely assume that women, Catholics, and atheists are similarly excluded (see Locke, A Letter Concerning Toleration), and are therefore left with Protestant men. As a child grows up, his capacity for reason increases. At some age (twenty-one in England, Locke notes), a child is presumed to have sufficient reason that he is no longer under the paternal power of his father, but is now an equal of his father (ST, 34). If a monarchal government claims to rule as a paternal power, that monarchy is, in effect, claiming that its subjects are unreasonable children, lunatics, or idiots.5
If those subjects are not unreasonable children, lunatics, or idiots, but men who meet Locke's criteria for reason, than that monarchal government is not a paternal power, but a despotic power. And this is the Second Treatise's revolutionary call: when boys are boys no more, "The father's empire then ceases, and he can from thence forwards no more dispose of the liberty of his son, than that of any other man: and it must be far from an absolute or perpetual jurisdiction, from which a man may withdraw himself, having license from divine authority to leave father and mother, and cleave to his wife" (ST, 36).6
Richard Ashcraft has argued that Locke's Second Treatise was not, centrally, a philosophical exposition on the right to revolution, but itself a political act, the ideological declaration, and call to arms, of radical Whigs who were soon to (fail to) carry out the Rye House Plot (1980). While Ashcraft's argument depends on historical evidence that is largely exterior to Locke's writings, this paper has outlined an interpretation of the Second Treatise that is wholly dependent on the text. While its purpose was a coherent interpretation of the Second Treatise, a byproduct of this interpretation is evidence supporting Ashcraft's "radical" thesis, if not his textual interpretation.
