While Hannah Arendt's work, The Origins of Totalitarianism was groundbreaking in its time and introduced the idea of totalitarianism as a novel political phenomenon, her theories are limited by the contradictions present within her arguments. These contradictions are particularly present in her discussion of the structural qualities of totalitarianism. Her arguments regarding the psychological explanations for how totalitarian movements come about, attain power, and are perpetuated are particularly compelling and not hindered by the inconsistencies present elsewhere in the book.
Arendt's explanation of the rise of totalitarian movements in the early 20th century hinge upon the concept of the "atomized man," someone who felt completely disconnected from all organizations and institutions, and was thus able to be swept up into the total sublimation of the self required by totalitarian ideologies. This willingness to sacrifice the self seemed to be a "...salvation from the automatic identification with pre-established functions in society and their utter banality, and at the same time to help destroy the functioning itself."
Totalitarian ideologies were devoted to the attainment of a utopian future world (whether race or class-based) and were so powerful precisely because they were so removed from the average citizen's daily existence. By focusing on the achievement of a paradisiacal world rule, which would be achieved due to the supra-human forces of history (although it would take longer without the help of mankind), these ideologies were able to create a pseudo-religious fervor in their adherents. The leader of the totalitarian movement maintained power through his ability to correct interpret and predict the historical trends upon which the ideology was based, and which would direct the movements' course of action. The semi-religious nature of these ideologies made it impossible for a doubter to reason with adherents. Totalitarian ideologies "...presented disagreements as invariably originating in the deep natural, social, or psychological sources beyond the control of the individual..."
The global ambitions of totalitarian movements allow them to demand complete self-sacrifice from their adherents, even before they attain power. As the ideology will, in time, encompass the entire human race, it would be absurd for followers not to be totally and unconditionally loyal and uncritical towards the movement.3 The prophetic nature of the leader's interpretation of totalitarian ideology does have its drawbacks, however. As the ideology is based on supra-human trends and the leader is the only person who is able to interpret these, the leader must be infallible. While totalitarian ideologies cannot be disputed through rational arguments from outsiders, inconsistencies within the movement might prove to cause disillusionment amongst the followers and potentially even be fatal to the movement itself. The leader must thus do everything within his power to make his prophecies come true, even if this means subverting the expressed aims of the original ideology.4 Once again, this shows how totalitarian movements can never be completely secure without world domination, for only in a world completely under the totalitarian leader's control can he manipulate actions so that he is never incorrect.
Arendt argues that structurally, "Nothing is more characteristic of the totalitarian movements in general and of the quality of fame of their leaders in particular than the startling swiftness with which they are forgotten and the startling ease with which they can be replaced."
The inapplicability of Arendt's assertion on the importance of a specific totalitarian leader as compared to historical events is further heightened through her own contradictory statements. Later on in the book, when describing the amorphous hierarchy that she believes characterizes a totalitarian state, Arendt argues "...its whole hierarchy has been efficiently trained for a single purpose – swiftly to communicate the will of the Leader to all ranks. When this has been achieved, the Leader is irreplaceable because the whole complicated structure of the movement would lose its raison d'être without his command."
Arendt further contradicts herself when discussing the role of terror and violence within a totalitarian system. She begins by stating that violence is predominantly used by totalitarian movements in their initial power-seeking stage to frighten their political opposition. Later on, she argues, terrorism is used simply to further their ideological objectives.8 This makes sense as intuitively it seems as if totalitarian governments would minimize their use of terrorism once in power. However, later on Arendt states that, "Terror continues to be used by totalitarian regimes even when its psychological aims are achieved: its real horror is that it reigns over a completely subdued population."
While Arendt does an exemplary job of explaining the psychological reasons behind the appearance of totalitarian governments in post-World War I society, her contradictions when discussing the structural nature of these movements significantly detracts from her arguments. The ideologies which totalitarian movements upheld attracted the atomized masses of the early 20th century, who felt that by subsuming themselves in a supra-human belief system which explicitly upheld the importance of cruelty, they were combating the liberal hypocritical nature of contemporary society. The global aspirations of these movements prevented their adherents from expressing any criticism of the ideology or those working on behalf of it. In addition, totalitarian leaders were motivated to global domination in order to ensure that their prophecies would come true. Arendt's view of the importance of a totalitarian movement's leader's personality is muddled, but I feel that some significance must be attributed to Aron's argument that it takes a specific personality to move from a totalitarian possibility to an actuality. Again, contradictions limit the usefulness of Arendt's views on the role on terror within a totalitarian movement that has attained power.
