The Supreme Court has held that candidate debates are a special class of programming because they are "by design a forum for political speech by candidates" and they are "of exceptional significance in the electoral process."
The debate in Vermont is a designated public forum because as the Court held in Forbes
As such the VCB's decision to exclude Osetek will fail to withstand a review by the courts. Osetek was excluded because he was, according to the VCB Administrator, a "dirty hippy". Clearly, VCB prevented Osetek from participating in the debate because of his views as a member of the Green Party, which diverges on a wide range of issues from both Democrats and Republicans. The court's ruling in Forbes has been understood to prohibit limits on participation in debates "based on subjective assessment of the seriousness of the viewpoint being expressed."
While VCB may claim that Osetek was excluded because of a lack of public interest in his candidacy, which was a successful approach for AETC in Forbes, that argument does not apply in this case. Osetek is currently in a statistical dead heat with both the Democratic and Republican candidate. Moreover, VCB may argue that the debate, in fact, is a non-public forum, where in order to exclude candidates it only needs to show that their action "was a reasonable, viewpoint neutral exercise of journalistic discretion."
The 1st Amendment protects the rights of people and organizations to associate freely with whomever they choose. Candidate Osetek, the Green Party, and the Democratic Party have agreed to associate. This decision was based on each of the actors' determination that by listing Osetek as a Green Party / Democratic Party candidate on the ballot, all would benefit in the election. The Supreme Court has held that "the Party's determination of the boundaries of its own association, and of the structure which best allows it to pursue its political goals, is protected by the constitution."
Vermont's Secretary of State may respond by arguing that the USSC in Timmons held that prohibiting "fusion" candidacies of the sort here is constitutional because "the ban does not involve regulation of political parties' internal affairs and core associational activities."
The Good Government Coalition's proposed public financing scheme appears to be unconstitutional. When a public financing scheme becomes so beneficial that candidates would be foolish to not participate, the candidates 1st Amendment rights are violated. While the courts have upheld public financing schemes in the past, the benefits of participation in Good Government's proposed scheme far outweigh those considered previously by the courts. Although both participants and non-participants will see their contributions from PAC's and 527's limited, the matching funds and lack of an expenditure ceiling makes the proposed scheme unconstitutionally coercive.
As referenced in Daggett the 1st Circuit has held "that the... benchmark of whether candidates 1st Amendment rights are burdened by a public financing system is whether the system allows candidates to make a voluntary choice about whether to pursue public funding"
In Daggett the 1st Circuit upheld Maine's public financing scheme that gave candidates matching funds up to two times the initial disbursement of public funds.13 The Court points to a 6th circuit decision, which upheld a Kentucky statute that gave candidates a two-for-one match on private contributions raised -- more beneficial then the scheme examined in Daggett.14 Nevertheless, Good Government proposes a scheme that would provide participating candidates with matching funds of 4 times each private donation. Additionally, the scheme sets no expenditure ceiling for those in the system. This scheme is more beneficial for participating candidates then the systems examined in both Daggett and Gabble.
Seeing that they system automatically gives participating candidates half of the total raised by the previous election's winning candidate and that it provides 4 times the amount of private donations received without an expenditure limit, candidates lack a rational "voluntary" choice for joining the system. Candidates would not rationally choose to forgo public funding because they would have to raise at least 4 times the amount of private dollars to match the spending power of those participating candidates. For this reason, the proposed system "strays beyond the pale, creating disparities so profound that they become impermissibly coercive"
Remember that the court in Buckley v. Valeo held that "money is speech" thus applying strict scrutiny review to any scheme that would limit the use of money by candidates to express their views.16 The contribution limits for PACs and 527s appear to be constitutional because they are narrowly tailored to serve the compelling state interest of preventing both the appearance and instances of actual corruption. However, since the scheme would place a coercive burden on the speech rights of candidates, overall it will fail a strict scrutiny review.
