In an effort to deter illegal immigration and decrease the threat to public safety, the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA) was passed in 1996, granting the U.S. government authority to detain virtually all immigrants who have committed a crime for an indefinite period of time1. As a result of IRRIRA2, the number of immigrants held in detention facilities has exploded, "prompting the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services to lease space in county jails and private detention centers around the country3." Detention facilities are overflowing with immigrants and deportation policy is one way to combat overcrowding in prisons, while also deporting dangerous immigrants who commit crimes. This paper focuses on immigrants who commit aggravated felonies and are subject to deportation without judicial review. I begin with a brief overview of the rationale and progression of deportation policy since the mid-1980s, including the policy specifics of IIRIRA and Immigration Reform and Control Act (IRCA) -- IRCA being responsible for targeting immigrant felons. I then identify four major problems with current deportation policy: 1) No differentiation in punishment with respect to the type of crime committed, 2) No consideration of prior criminal history in determining punishment, 3) No judicial review in the deportation process, and 4) No regard for the potential loss of economic contribution to society. I conclude by proposing policy alternatives that would better address the intended objectives of removing criminal immigrant offenders who represent the most serious threat to public safety and national security.
Immigrants by definition are precluded from partaking in certain rights and benefits afforded to citizens. Their presence in the United States is authorized by the government prior to entry and can be terminated as well. It is a privilege for immigrants to reside and work in the United States, and therefore, Congress has jurisdiction over the rights and the treatment of immigrants: "Congress has the authority to discriminate with impunity; it has done so on the basis of national origin and race, and currently employs a system of priorities that excludes, among others, persons with undesirable political beliefs, moral character, and mental or physical disability4 "
The U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS), formerly known as the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) prior to its transition into the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) in 2003, defines deportation as "the formal removal of an alien from the United States when the alien has been found removable for violating the immigration laws5 "
While the process may appear fair and efficient, it is both tedious and unreasonable because "aliens (non-citizens) who are apprehended and not released from custody are placed in detention facilities.9 "
Since the enactment of the IRCA in 1986, a separate category of "aggravated felonies" committed by immigrants was drafted to remove the most dangerous immigrant offenders in an effort to maintain public safety and national security. IRCA was an appropriate policy response to rising anti-immigration sentiment insofar as it appeared to mitigate the fears of American citizens who believed immigrants were saturating the job market, committing more crimes, and introducing unwanted cultural traits. However, with regard to its ability to expel the most dangerous offenders, IRCA failed as an effective policy strategy.
IRCA did little to increase the number of deportations "because courts and immigration officials did not systematically share records; many immigrants convicted of crimes eventually served their sentences and returned to their normal lives in American society. Criminal aliens who faced removal proceedings could [also] be granted relief by immigration judges who considered their family ties to U.S. citizens and permanent residents11 "
Furthermore, the criminal alien provisions of 1986 were also provoked by sharp increases in the severity and length of punishment for drug offenses. The heightened focus on tackling the drug problem in the 1980s and 1990s can be explained by the increase in drug convictions illustrated by the Table A below from 1984 to 1994. The Bureau of Justice Statistics reports that non-citizens serving federal prison sentences "increased an average of 15% annually while the overall Federal prison population increased an average of 10% annually13 "
Federal mandatory minimum sentence reforms like the Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984 (CCCA) and the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986 (ADAA) increased "the proportion of drug defendants sentenced to a term of imprisonment from 72% during 1984 to 89% during 1999. Nearly two-thirds of those sentenced during 1999 were subject to a statutory minimum prison term. The proportion of the sentence that drug offenders entering Federal prison could expect to serve increased from 48% to 87%19 "
Table D above emphasizes the overall result of mandatory minimum sentencing reforms that drastically increased the length of imprisonment of non-citizens:
Not only was IRCA unsuccessful in deporting immigrants who committed crimes because of administrative hold-ups, but America's "War on Drugs" played a significant role in contributing to the prison population crisis.
With IIRIRA's passage, judicial review was abolished, the policy was made retroactive, and immigrants can now be deported before, during, or after criminal sentences are being served. Furthermore, IIRIRA added a provision that made crimes of violence, for which the sentence is at least one year, count as an aggravated felony, giving more weight to the sentence rendered as opposed to the crime committed in some cases. In Title II Section (A) entitled, "Conviction of Certain Crimes," IIRIRA classified crimes of moral turpitude23 as a deportable offense if the sentence carries one year or more, and has further classified certain misdemeanor offenses warranting removal: domestic violence, stalking, child abuse, child neglect, child abandonment, and violation of protective or restraining order24. As a result, whether a person commits a misdemeanor crime like petty theft or first degree murder, had a clean record for several years or is a repeat offender, deportation would apply without consideration to such staggering differences.
By utilizing its full discretion to regulate immigrants, Congress has not only made deportation of immigrant felons a policy goal, but has also truncated several forms of legal recourse against deportation in an effort to reduce crime. The absence of judicial review precludes the ability of immigrant felons subject to deportation to appeal a decision they believe was unfairly or unconstitutionally arrived upon by the Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA). Courts defer to the executive branch to not only handle deportation cases, but also appeals cases. The Attorney General appoints immigration judges who serve on an administrative court, and there is no policy provision in place to allow for intervention by the judicial branch to review the removal decisions of the administrative courts.
The retroactive nature of IIRIRA is especially problematic because "convictions of non-citizens throughout the United States continue to occur by plea bargains" with an understanding that once prison time is served the immigrant charged would not have to consider additional penalties as a result of his/her decision to plea bargain25. Immigrants may opt to plead guilty with the understanding there would be no further punishment or negative immigration consequences26. Furthermore, many criminal defendant lawyers are unfamiliar with the specific consequences for immigrants who commit certain crimes, and therefore, are not always able to serve in the best interest of their client in court. Lastly, immigrants can be deported at anytime once convicted of an aggravated felony. Immigrants can also be held in detention if unable to immediately be deported after serving their prison sentence. Furthermore, IIRIRA's "'expedited removal' provision allows for non-citizens to be deported without ever seeing an immigration judge [and] mandates that the individual be detained until deported. Mandatory detention could require incarceration thousands of miles away from family members while awaiting the results of lengthy and uncertain appeals,27 "
Immigration policy decisions have important implications for U.S. national interests, and are in fact made based on those interests: "fears of overcrowding, unemployment, scarcity of resources, and fears of cultural fragmentation make the politics of immigration extremely complex28 "
Immigrants also face the stark reality of restrictive legislation that prevents them from fully benefiting from the opportunities afforded and guaranteed to U.S. citizens30. Because state and federal governments have the right to discriminate with respect to immigrants, it is especially important that Congress pass legislation that works to achieve the intended policy goal while also treating immigrants fairly. There is both an economic and moral justification to do so: 1) Immigration encourages "economic growth and an enlarged workforce" and 2) The U.S. is a nation of immigrants, "all whom have benefited from immigration and should not claim any right to exclude future immigrants. Also, family reunification is at the core of much of our immigration policy and is based upon a fundamental respect for the right to be with one's loved ones31 "
Immigration crime policies are just one example of a policy that suffers from unnecessary harshness and unfairness. The failure of the criminal justice system to ensure due process must not be the reason for deportation -- rather, deportation orders should be arrived at with proper justification of the immigrant's criminal behavior. Deportation does not have to be eradicated in order to be fair to immigrants. However, the Supreme Court can still be involved in assuring that Congress does not abuse its authority over immigration matters.
A comprehensive list of aggravated felonies can be found in the "Criminal Alien Provisions" section of IIRIRA law under "Title III: Inspection, Apprehension, Detention, Adjudication, and Removal of Inadmissible and Deportable Aliens32 "
There are four major problems with the current policy: 1) No differentiation in punishment with respect to the type of crime committed, 2) No consideration of prior criminal history in determining punishment 3) No judicial review in the deportation process, and 4) No regard for the potential loss of economic contribution to society.
The 1994 report issued by the U.S. Commission on Immigration Reform, which later provided a useful backdrop in support of the immigration reforms that took place in 1996, explicitly articulates the intent of deporting immigrants who commit crimes: "An effective procedure for prompt removal of aliens that are ordered for deportation is an essential part of a credible deterrence policy. At present, the Commission limits its specific recommendations to the removal of criminal aliens who represent the most serious threat to public safety and national security. The top priority of enforcement strategies should be the removal of criminal aliens from the U.S. in such a way that the potential for their return to the U.S. will be minimized34 "
The process of differentiating punishment with respect to the crime committed entails consideration of not only the crime committed, but also whether or not the individual has a prior criminal record. Therefore, the problem with not considering a non-citizen's prior history of criminal activity can also be seen as an extension of tackling the first policy problem35.
The United States Sentencing Commission (USSC) is an independent agency in the judicial branch of government that was established to create a series of "guidelines to be consulted regarding the appropriate form and severity of punishment for offenders convicted of federal crimes [and to] advise and assist Congress and the executive branch in the development of an effective and efficient crime policy36 "
According to the USSC, prior criminal histories are just as important as the severity of the crime committed:
The likelihood of the crime being committed again by the same person has a substantial impact on the risk posed to society because repeat offenders are more likely to commit a crime. Furthermore, "repeated criminal behavior is an indicator of a limited likelihood of successful rehabilitation," thus serving as an additional reliable measure of the severity of the threat a criminal poses to society, while also justifying the need to impose a harsher sentence38.
The significance of taking into account prior criminal records is to also give equal consideration to criminals with no prior criminal records, or first time offenders. Not only are first time offenders less likely to commit another crime compared to repeat offenders, but the lack of a criminal history is indicative of someone who poses little risk to public safety and is more likely to be successfully rehabilitated. The Department of Justice's 1996 Report, "Non-citizens in the Federal Criminal Justice System, 1984-94," offers a comparative view of criminal records of citizen and non-citizen defendants prosecuted in U.S. district courts in 1994. Interestingly enough, Table 4 below indicates that of those with a prior criminal history, a higher percentage of citizens commit misdemeanors and felonies (both violent and nonviolent). U.S. citizens are also more likely to be repeat offenders while non-citizen offenders are more likely to be first time offenders. Furthermore, non-citizen offenders commit more nonviolent felonies (21.4%) than violent felonies (9.3%). First time offenders, citizen or non-citizen, should be judged more so on the nature of the crime.
Perhaps the most draconian measure of IIRIRA pertains to the strict limitations of the litigation process outlined for immigrants in Section I, Title III of IIRIRA law.i Limitations include no judicial review for anyone convicted of an aggravated felony: "other than the granting of asylum, no court has jurisdiction to review discretionary decisions or actions of the Attorney General, including denials of discretionary relief under cancellation of removal and suspension, voluntary departure, or adjustment40 "
These three factors severely restrict the right to a fair hearing because immigration judges are more likely to be biased in favor of the Attorney General's interpretation of immigration law and policy. As long as the option for judicial review remains absent from the judicial process of immigrants who commit aggravated felonies, the legal process will continue to suffer from its inability to ensure a fair hearing, and non-citizens implicated in this process may suffer with no protection under the law.
The U.S. invests in immigrants primarily because of the benefits it receives from immigration. By offering opportunities for immigrants to receive an education and work in the U.S., the economy and society are positively affected by immigrant labor, thereby contributing to diversity, and validating the idea that the U.S. is a country of freedom, liberty, and prosperity. In fact, the 1997 Report to Congress on Immigration Policy by the U.S. Commission on Immigration Reform states the following: "Immigrants contribute in many ways to the United States: to its vibrant and diverse communities; to its lively and participatory democracy; to its vital intellectual and cultural life; to its renowned job-creating entrepreneurship and marketplaces; and to its family values and hard-work ethic42 "
It is in the national interest of the United States to assess whether or not deporting immigrant felons outweighs the economic loss to society in order to avoid attempting to resolve a crime problem by creating an economic one. And this can be achieved through appropriate measurements of the projected economic loss to family members and others dependant upon the financial support of the immigrant felon charged with deportation. Employment provides an opportunity for immigrants to fully integrate themselves into the cultural norms and practices of American society. Interestingly enough, a substantial number of immigrants to the U.S. have been able to find employment without fully integrating themselves into American cultural and educational institutions. Due to the changing demographics of immigrants coming to the United States as a result of the 1965 immigration amendments, labor markets have shifted to give more opportunities to unskilled workers or immigrants willing to work for less pay: "The 1965 Amendments 'redistributed' visas from advanced, industrialized economies to developing countries. Because the average educational attainment in developing countries is below that of industrialized economies, the immigrants who arrived in the 1980s and 1990s would then tend to be less educated than the immigrants who arrived in the 1950s44 "
Even though levels of educational attainment have dropped, the value of unskilled labor has increased. Although George Borjas in Heaven's Door: Immigration Policy and the American Economy downplays the impact of discrimination in the U.S. labor market in explaining wage differentials between immigrants and citizens, there is some truth to the fact that "even the influx of unskilled workers -- often the group most feared for the potential to sap the country's social programs and resources -- aid U.S. economic growth by filling jobs that many U.S. citizens and permanent residents do not want46 "
Immigrants with employment, combined with the substantial number of family-based immigration, suggests that deporting immigrants for crimes translates into a consequential financial loss for all persons dependant on that immigrant for income like children and the elderly, particularly because many immigrants may not have the educational background to change job careers or obtain a better job in the same field. The government's recognition of the significance of social networks and supportive family structures is not only evidenced in the fact that the largest category of immigrant admissions to the U.S. is family-based (approximately 70%47), but also because immigration policy is based on social and humanitarian grounds:
Conversely, by not properly considering the negative impact or economic loss to society due to the deportation of immigrant felons, deportation may end up hurting the U.S. economy more than helping it. Additionally, the fact that most immigrants are children, parents, and spouses (and not single or living independently) suggests that immigrants place a high priority on family/group dependence or social networks and rely on one another in helping maintain a productive, healthy, and stable life in the U.S. whether by financial, emotional, or other means.
Substantial portions of family-based immigrants are also legal permanent residents. LPRs or green-card holders are immigrants lawfully admitted to live and work in the United States. They "are most like citizens: this country is their permanent home; they pay taxes, are subject to military service, contribute to the economic and cultural life of their communities, and generally have a stake in the country that a nonimmigrant alien cannot ordinarily claim. LPRs are entitled to protection under the Equal Protection guarantees of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments1". LPR status not only affords non-citizens certain benefits like the right to live and work in the United States, but also is indicative of a law-abiding person capable of being a U.S. citizen, and LPRs are given the opportunity to apply for citizenship. Other benefits include the right to own property, attend public school and college, request a visa for immediate family members, receive social welfare services, leave and return to the U.S. under certain conditions, etc1. The USCIS clearly differentiates LPR status from other immigrant-entry categories by granting them the most similar rights and responsibilities to that of citizens. However, when it comes to aggravated felonies, LPRs are treated no differently than other immigrants, such as temporary workers or even illegal aliens. The significance of differentiating LPRs from other immigrants with respect to crime is the fact that LPRs are arguably the most productive, long-term contributors to the U.S. economy and society both in monetary and social wealth compared to other immigrant groups. Not only have their assimilation and integration into society fostered their ability to enjoy the benefits and opportunities America has to offer, but has also made it possible for immigrants to substantially give back to the society and help expand opportunities to both Americans and other immigrants seeking entry to the United States.
A policy that would better achieve the intended policy objectives of IIRIRA, is one that that differentiates between violent and nonviolent aggravated felonies, takes into consideration prior criminal records, while also re-instituting judicial review to ensure due process under the law in accordance with the U.S. Constitution. Furthermore, in order for the punishment to be commensurate with the crime, priority should be given to the most egregious offenses within the aggravated felons category. Judicial review can then be exercised to ensure that courts take into account prior criminal history or lack thereof, employment, and LPR status in order to determine if deportation is warranted49.
The first step in implementing a credible crime-deterrent policy is separating non-violent crimes from violent crimes, such as tax evasion from murder, for example. In fact, the USSC's Offense Category List is an extensive catalog of crimes categorized by the similarity and severity of the criminal offense: Offenses Against the Person, Basic Economic Offenses, Offenses Involving Drugs, Offenses Involving Criminal Enterprises and Racketeering50, etc. Violent crimes are defined here as crimes committed against another person, and most likely involve physical or mental abuse. All other crimes are deemed nonviolent. Below is a list of aggravated felonies separated into violent and nonviolent crimes. While there is no variation in treatment within the nonviolent and violent category, and the potential for more than one type of crime to occur in the same criminal act may be likely, at the very least, such a category provides the first step towards assigning harsher sentences to more violent crimes.
Aggravated Felonies Category for Immigrants51
In addition to the category of offenses above, there also exists an "offender characteristics" category that takes into account the specifics of the crime as well as prior criminal offenses. There is a point system in place as well as a guideline range of offenses that determine the final sentence. There even exists the ability for judges to depart from the guideline statutes in atypical criminal cases in order to make the best and most appropriate determination of punishment. The offender characteristics category should be applied to the aggravated felonies category for immigrants.
Lastly, the USSC outlines Congress's policy objectives in designing the sentencing guideline scheme that it utilizes:
There is no reason why the same logic with the same policy objectives cannot be utilized for non-citizens -- after all the crime is the same, the only factor that varies is the immigration status of the person committing the crime.
Similar to policy alternative 1, the USSC guidelines can also be utilized to allow for proper consideration of prior criminal records or lack thereof. The Comprehensive Control Act of 1984, which "overhauled the federal sentencing system and revised bail [and] extended federal jurisdiction over crime control to areas once considered to be within state and local jurisdiction," is explicitly cited in the "Criminal History and Criminal Livelihood" section of USSC guidelines53. The opening paragraph of the recidivism section of the USSC guidelines states "a defendant's record of past criminal conduct is directly relevant to the purposes of [CCA]. A defendant with a record of prior criminal behavior is more culpable than a first offender and thus deserving of greater punishment54 "
The rationale for point (g) is to impose a less harsh sentence for a less harsh crime while still punishing nonviolent offenders for the crime they committed.
Judicial review is one of the most sacred powers utilized by the courts to ensure that the other branches of government adhere to the Constitution. Therefore, if the executive branch, for example, is perceived to have abridged the Constitution or violated the Constitutional rights of an individual, judicial review would allow the courts to review policy decisions that account for the violation of the Constitution. Furthermore, in some cases, courts have the power to reverse those policy decisions that are perceived to be inconsistent with the Constitution.
Therefore, the first policy alternative reads as follows:
a) Immigration judges can continue to make decisions in removal hearings, however, with respect to nonviolent offenses committed by immigrants, defendants should have the right to petition for review from an impartial judge not appointed or working for the Attorney General, thereby instituting a check by the courts to ensure that immigration judges' decisions are constitutional and in compliance with the statutory obligations of immigration law.
Prior to the passage of IIRIRA, "on a petition for review, the court may review not only a finding of removability, but also denials of motions to reopen. The reviewing court decides the case on the basis of the administrative record, not by taking new evidence of its own 56 "
b) Given the reinstatement of judicial review for nonviolent crimes, when reviewing a case, judges reserve the right to request new evidence of its own if the BIA failed to properly take into consideration 1st time offender status or other factors relating to the potential loss of the deportee's economic contribution to society: job, education, years living in the U.S., family ties, etc. Impartial judges also reserve the right to reverse the decision and or send the case to the BIA for further review along with new evidence.
c) If a combination of violent and nonviolent crimes occur for a first time immigrant offender, the judge reserves the right to adhere to point b above.
Such options would ensure that immigration courts strictly adhere to the sentencing guidelines with regard to the nature of the offense (offense category) and the individual circumstances and criminal history (offender characteristics) when deciding to deport an immigrant for an aggravated felony. Furthermore, if it is the case that an immigration judge arrived at an unjustifiable, improper, or unclear decision, policy alternative (b) and (c) afford impartial judges the ability to reverse the decision or send it back to the BIA for further review with new evidence if necessary.
According to USSC guidelines, nonviolent offenses could have serious consequences depending up on the characteristics of the offender. For example, economic offenses like embezzlement or fraud could result in deportation if committed several times, or if a prior criminal record exists with regard to other crimes. The case for a waiver is perhaps most strongly made when considering LPR status. Consider the following scenario: Jane is a single mother with three children, has LPR status, and has been living in the U.S. for 15 years. She is charged and convicted with prostitution. The fact that Jane can be deported for prostitution and lose her children, job, money, and all other ties to the U.S., one wonders how someone like Jane even qualifies as a threat to national security given the circumstances of her case. Therefore, policy alternatives in this case should read as follows:
Nonviolent offenders and first-time violent offenders (except murder) Only:
a) Immigrants who commit nonviolent offenses have the ability to apply for a waiver for deportation.
b) Provide first time violent offenders with the option to present employment and LPR status factors in court for consideration, however, the BIA reserves the right to deny option if able to prove atypical case.
c) With regard to employment documents, non-citizens may present an estimate of projected loss of income to family or persons dependent on that income. Also, if more than 60% of income covers living expenses (rent, mortgage, utilities, and groceries), including expenses for education, non-citizen reserves the right to testify in court along with persons dependent on that income for consideration.
d) In the case of LPRs who are first time offenders in the case of murder, option b does not apply.
The option to present employment documents and projected loss of income allows for more serious consideration of how substantial of an economic loss to society will be incurred compared to the crime for which the non-citizen is being deported. Dependency, as defined by living and educational expenses, in excess of 60% of a non-citizen's income suggests that more than half of the non-citizen's paycheck is taking care of others. The rationale for 60% is that regardless of the overall income of the non-citizen, more than half of the income is utilized for others, suggesting substantial dependency of others on the noncitizen's income.
Murder is the exception to the rule for LPR offenders because murder is arguably the most egregious violent crime within the violent crime category. Additionally, "IIRIRA specifically bars judicial review of any decision by the Attorney General with respect to discretionary relief. [Forms of discretionary relief are asylum requests, registry 57, voluntary departure, cancellation of removal 58, adjustment of status 59, etc.]. If the alien believes s/he is eligible for any type of discretionary relief, s/he must apply during the removal hearing or risk being denied the opportunity to apply. Furthermore, even if the alien meets the statutory requirements, the BIA concluded that the granting of the relief is still discretionary 60 "
e) Institute option to apply for discretionary relief for nonviolent offenses with the ability to apply either during the removal hearing or before 90 days after the hearing. If immigrant meets statutory provisions for relief, the BIA reserves the right to deny relief only in atypical cases and must prove atypical determination.
Prior to IIRIRA, the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) authorized a ninety-day limit for "an alien to reopen proceedings of a final administrative order and one motion to reconsider the decision within 30 days of the date of entry of a final administrative order of removal 61 "
The most problematic aspect of the policy alternatives set forth in this paper are the increase in federal criminal caseloads as a result of the legal stipulations and time allotments offered to provide a just and effective deportation policy. In the 2002 Report, Implementing Case Completion Goals at the U.S. Department of Justice, Board of Immigration Appeals, an earlier report conducted by the Federal Judicial Center offered policy suggestions to combat the problem they call the "Crisis of Volume" is mentioned:
In 2002, 35,000-40,000 cases awaited review and some of them dated back as far as 1996. In May of 2005, an LA Times report stated the following: "The trend is nationwide, federal records show, but bearing the brunt of this sudden surge is the San Francisco-based U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals. In the year ending June 30, 2001, the immigration caseload was 965. It skyrocketed to 4,835 cases in the year ending in June 2004. 'Three years ago, immigration cases were 8% of our calendar,' said 9th Circuit Judge Michael Daly Hawkins. 'Today, as we speak, that percentage is 48%. 64'".
In 2002, Attorney General John Ashcroft said, "Since 1995, the problem of mounting backlog of cases has been addressed by incremental increases in the size of the Board...However, the problem with the board is not of personnel. Rather, the problem is rooted in the structure and procedures of the Board, which make it nearly impossible for Board members to accomplish their mission65...". Ashcroft then imposed a streamlining initiative that currently accounts for the ineffectiveness of deportation policy by eradicating legal avenues in an effort to speed up the hearing process66.
However, with a more improved deportation policy that distinguishes between nonviolent and violent crimes, criminal caseloads may potentially decrease gradually if for example the following policy alternative is taken into consideration:
f) Where nonviolent offenders or LPR nonviolent offenders are entitled to forms of discretionary relief, including application for a waiver for deportation, staff and judges can specialize in dealing with such offenders separate from other non-citizen criminals. Judges that specialize in overseeing certain cases can then be designated solely to address crimes committed by LPRs in order to make more-informed decisions about granting relief or charging deportation.
Specialization aids efficiency. Training judges to further specialize in certain criminal court cases concerning immigrant felons will also help establish a more logical policy repercussion that will expedite the appeals process. Why? Because judges will have more familiarity with the special circumstances, and thus be more likely to exercise fairness more applicable to that circumstance. For example, first time violent offenders are different from repeat violent offenders and thus judges will be able to discriminate more fairly. Even if the number of judges' increase as a result of specialization, it does not necessarily translate into a backlog of cases. In fact, specialization may greatly aid in alleviating the backlog problem.
In this paper, I have attempted to provide policy alternatives aimed at isolating immigrant felons who pose the most dangerous threat to society, while also proposing a model of differential punishment for violent and nonviolent crimes that utilize the USSC sentencing guidelines. I have also made recommendations that better justify deportation for immigrant felons, including tracking prior criminal records, re-instituting judicial review for nonviolent crimes, accounting for legal permanent resident and employment status, and encouraging judges to further specialize their expertise when presiding over cases of immigrants who commit aggravated felonies.
Deportation policy suffers from several structural barriers and flawed rules and regulations that inhibit the ability of the U.S. government to achieve its intended objective of tackling overcrowded detention facilities by addressing crimes committed by immigrants. However, the opportunity for a more effective deportation policy that is conducive to combating issues of detention, aggravated felons, and judicial review is an extant possibility, should more attention be paid to the aforementioned deportation policy problems.
