Because the new provision addresses political speech, any investigations into its constitutionality will involve a strict basis of review1. As such, two requirements must be met for the new provision to pass constitutional muster: 1) the state must prove a compelling interest for adopting the provision, 2) the provision must be narrowly tailored to that interest. In White, the Court acknowledged that maintaining the impartiality of the judiciary, with impartiality meaning "openmindedness" or the demand that "[a judge] be willing to consider views that oppose his preconceptions, and remain open to persuasion"
The new provision must also show that it is narrowly tailored to the aforementioned interest. The Court ruled that the "announce clause" was not narrowly tailored because it was under-inclusive in limiting statements only at "certain times and in certain forms"
The manner by which states appoint electors is governed by Article II of the constitution, which specifies that "each state shall appoint, in such manner as the Legislature thereof may direct, a number of electors". Those in opposition to the proposed plan may argue that the State, as a body politic, must appoint electors as a whole9. They argue that "appointments of electors by districts are not an appointment by the State, because all citizens otherwise qualified are not permitted to vote for all the presidential electors"
The proposal's methods are also akin to the "congressional mandate," which requires the election of congressional members through single member districts. Although Article 1, section 2 stipulates that "the people of the several states" shall elect members of Congress, the Court did not find constitutional fault in members being elected through districts rather than at large13; the interests of the "people" can therefore continue to be expressed despite the absence of statewide concurrence. Because congressional members can be elected through districts and still maintain the integrity of the people's voice, the proposed plan can similarly accomplish the same goal.
The question of who has the authority to approve change in elector selection, however, can raise an issue of constitutionality. Article II stipulates that the "manner" by which states appoint electors is "directed" by the "Legislature thereof". Legislatures have "plenary power...in the matter of the appointment of electors"
IIA. Voting is a fundamental political right18, and it falls primarily upon the states to ensure its realization19. As such, states must ensure the "equal weight" of each vote, and it may not "by arbitrary and disparate treatment, value one person's vote over that of another"
Because the current question involves possible infringements on the right to vote, plaintiffs will request a strict standard of review21. However, the standard of scrutiny will not matter much since the 6th Circuit Court of Appeals ruled in a similar case that the use of non error notice technology like the punchcard and lever systems "would also fail under rational basis of review"
The plaintiffs argue that "no state shall deny to any person...the equal protection of the laws"
The plaintiffs will allege that the arbitrary choice of which voting machines will be used in each city violates their right to due process. The plaintiffs, as in Black v. McGuffage, are questioning the "statutory scheme which, depending upon the choices made by local election jurisdiction officials, will necessarily result in the dilution of an entire group of citizens' right to vote"
The use of less accurate machines in predominantly minority populated Steel Town and Iron city will raise complaints under section 2 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965. The law condemns any practice that "results in a denial or abridgement of the right...to vote on account of race or color"
As counsel to the governor, I would first advice him to raise a claim of res judicata, since the current suit bears much similarity to Suburban Action Coalition v. Goldman, et. al. case. In order to establish such a claim, three requirements must be made: 1) similarity in the identity of claims, 2) whether there was a final judgment on the merits, 3) privitiy between the parties 37. In Suburban, the plaintiffs demanded that Michigana use touch screen technology in the entire state. The evidence they presented in that case will therefore be the same as what the NAACP, et. al. will present: that the use of non-error warning technology like punchcard and lever systems leads to high incidences of residual votes, and ultimately dilutes the weight of their votes. Both cases therefore claim an infringement of the same right, the right to vote. The two cases also arise from the same nucleus of facts (the most important requirement in establishing a similarity of claims38) since the basic constitutional challenges to the use of outdated machines (violation of equal protection and due process) are the same. The only variation between the two cases is the current litigation's VRA claims, which I will diffuse shortly. Because the parties in Suburban entered "a consent decree" a final judgment was made on the merits of the case39. Finally, there is privity -- which is established if the parties' interests "are so closely aligned as to be virtually representative"
The plaintiffs VRA complaints can be countered by noting that rural areas, which don't have heavy minority populations, have not adopted touch screen voting machines. One can argue that these areas are also likely to have large numbers of residual votes though they lack a large minority population. Therefore, under the "totality of the circumstances" no infringement on rights due to race has been made.
