Bias based on sexual orientation and identity has been associated with a wide range of negative outcomes. For example, sexual minorities (i.e., individuals whose sexual behavior, psychological orientation, or identity is at least somewhat same-sex oriented) report significant levels of psychological distress in response to sexual identity-based hate crimes as well as heterosexist and homophobic comments (Szymanski, 2005). Experimental evidence suggests that even ambient heterosexist comments and actions -- not targeted directly at the observer but nonetheless occurring in his or her surrounding environment -- causes stress to sexual minority individuals (Burn, Kadlec, & Rexer, 2005; Konik, 2005; Silverschanz, 2007). And it has been proposed that all people, regardless of identity or orientation, are affected negatively by ambient prejudice such as sexism, heterosexism, and homophobia (Cortina, Magley, Williams, & Langout, 2001; Franck, 2002; Silverschanz, 2007).
There are numerous ways to measure attitudes towards sexual minorities, including scales of internalized homophobia (sexual minorities' shame and self-hatred based on negative societal messages about being non-heterosexual; e.g., Martin & Dean, 1988, as cited in Peterson & Gerrity, 2005) and measures of people's beliefs and attitudes towards sexual minorities more generally (e.g., Herek, 1994; Morrison & Morrison, 2002; Morrison, Parriag, & Morrison, 1999; Raja & Stokes, 1998; Steffens, 2005). However, explicit prejudicial attitudes may not be the only contributors to discriminatory behaviors and bias. More subtle underlying attitudes and beliefs about the nature of sexuality and what constitutes a normal and healthy adult relationship may also affect such outcomes. One approach to studying these underlying issues is to examine the effects of normative societal expectations about sexual behavior and identities. This area of study may be defined as heteronormativity, a construct that is often cited in gender studies as an important contributor to heterosexism, homophobia, and sexism (e.g., Blasius, 2000; Grace, 1999; Lancaster, 2003; Phelan, 2001, all cited in Kitzinger, 2005; also see Tee & Hegarty, 2006).
Heteronormativity has been defined as enforced compliance with culturally determined heterosexual roles (Nielsen, Walden, & Kunkel, 2000), and assumptions about heterosexuality as "natural" or "normal" (Kitzinger, 2005). Gender is closely related and often intertwined with such definitions, for normative heterosexuality cannot exist without rigid, binary expectations of behavior based on gender (e.g., Jackson, 2006). For example, heteronormativity has a circular relationship with hegemonic masculinity, both creating and resulting from the strict boundaries delimiting acceptable male behavior (e.g., Jones, 2006; Martino, 2000).
Jackson (2006, p. 114) explains that heteronormativity is "mobilized and reproduced" in ordinary, everyday social discourse and behavior, and Yep (2003, p. 13) proposes that it is caused by an "anxious" urge to protect illusory beliefs that heterosexuality is natural, normal, and inevitable. Rubin (1975), Rich (1980), and Jackson (1999), previously explored the "obligatory...compulsory...(and) compulsive" pressures toward heterosexuality (all cited in Yep, p. 18). Yep builds on this work to elucidate the violence that heteronormativity inflicts on women (by requiring that they serve men in marriage and motherhood), men (by defining rigid expectations of hegemonic masculinity), sexual minorities (by defining them as "other" and thus not fully human), and individuals who experience multiple forms of prejudice and marginalization due to the intersections of racial, ethnic, gender, sexual, and other identities. Consistent with Yep's portrayal of heteronormative violence, Lind (2004) points out that sexual minorities living in poverty are especially disenfranchised; they have limited access to resources, and the social services that would otherwise be available to heterosexually-headed households are denied to them due to definitions of marriage and family in welfare law.
Another negative consequence of social norms for sexual minorities is repeatedly confronting assumptions about heterosexuality, which results in having to make daily decisions about coming out or "passing," both of which involve particular stressors (Land & Kitzinger, 2005). Similarly, at social functions such as weddings, where the social capital of heterosexuality is celebrated and revered, sexual minorities are either invisible or "othered" (Oswald, 2000). In two recent studies (Harwood, 1998; Hylton, 2005), lesbian social work students reported that their colleagues and instructors assumed they were heterosexual unless they explicitly stated otherwise, that sexual minority concerns were not given as much importance as other aspects of social justice, and that privileging of and assumptions about heterosexuality led to feelings of isolation and invisibility among these lesbian students. In another qualitative study, Nielsen, Walden, & Kunkel (2000) explained that male undergraduate students who purposefully violated traditional gender norms encountered homophobic jokes and protestations by interlocutors of their own heterosexuality, while female students transgressing normative gender roles received unsolicited advice about adhering to femininity if they hoped to attract a mate. As construed by Yep (2003), and demonstrated by numerous qualitative investigations, the "violence" of heteronormativity is perpetuated on several levels: institutional, interpersonal, and even intrapsychic (i.e., the self-hatred of internalized homophobia in sexual minorities).
Although heteronormativity has not been explicitly examined in quantitative social science research, studies have examined closely related constructs. For instance, authoritarianism is directly associated with support of traditional, hierarchical power structures that demand rigid adherence to traditional gender roles (Duncan, Peterson, & Winter, 1997; Whitley & Ægisdottir, 2000). Authoritarianism has also been specifically linked to negative attitudes towards sexual minorities (Haddock, Zanna, and Esses, 1993, as cited in Ducnan, Peterson, & Winter, 1997; Tee & Hegarty, 2006). In turn, negative attitudes towards sexual minorities have also correlated with lower levels of openness to experience (Cullen, Wright, & Alessandri, 2002), and inflexible beliefs about fundamental, categorical differences between people based on sexual identity or orientation (Hegarty & Pratto, 2001).
In sum, heteronormative attitudes and beliefs define the boundaries of normative sexual behavior (e.g., people should partner with others of the opposite sex), and relate to proscriptions against behaviors and feelings that violate these norms. In addition, heteronormativity is theorized to rely on underlying assumptions about binary, essentialist beliefs about sex and gender. However, current literature includes neither a measure of the construct of heteronormativity, nor a quantitative investigation of the relationships among heteronormative attitudes, attitudes towards sexual minorities, and other relevant personality constructs. The aim of this study was to develop a measure of heteronormativity, the Heteronormative Attitudes and Beliefs Scale (HABS), and to examine relationships among heteronormativity, authoritarianism, and attitudes towards lesbians and gays. For the purposes of this study, heteronormativity will be defined as beliefs about (1) sex and gender as binary and biologically determined and (2) the assumed normality of sexual relationships between males/men and females/women.
I hypothesized that the HABS would be comprised of two factors, which would map onto the two components of heteronormativity described above (binary/biologically determined sex and gender, and normative behavioral expectations). I further hypothesized that scores on this new measure would correlate significantly with authoritarian attitudes and prejudicial attitudes towards lesbians and gays.
Eighty-four undergraduate students participated in this study, including 49 students from an introductory-level abnormal psychology course and 35 from an upper-level psychology course on gender and sexual identity (mean age = 20, range = 18-22 years). Approximately ¼ of the participants (24%) were male, ¾ were female, and none of the participants identified as transgender. In addition, 11% (n = 10) of the participants were sexual minorities and 21% (n = 18) identified as racial or ethnic minorities. Minority group categorizations were based on open-ended questions about race/ethnicity ("How would you describe your racial or ethnic identity?") and sexual orientation ("How would you describe your sexual orientation?"). Racial and ethnic minority participants included students identifying as Asian, Indian, Middle Eastern, or Chinese (n = 9); Latino/a, Hispanic, or Puerto Rican (n = 5); African-American or Black (n = 3); and Native American (n = 1). Sexual minority identity responses included "mostly straight" (n = 2); questioning, open, undefined, or bisexual (n = 6); and gay (n = 2). In addition, 9 students identified as a "straight ally" or "open heterosexual" and were categorized as heterosexual.
The Heteronormative Attitudes and Beliefs Scale (HABS) was developed from a set of 38 items which were selected, adapted, or designed to load on two hypothesized factors: (1) essentialized and binary beliefs about gender and sex and (2) normative behavioral expectations for men and women in romantic or sexual relationships (see Table 1 for items). Several items pertaining to binary and essentialized beliefs about gender and sex were adapted from Tee & Hegarty (2006). Approximately ½ of the items were positively worded (i.e., higher levels of agreement = higher levels of heteronormativity) and the remaining items were negatively worded (i.e., higher levels of agreement = lower levels of heteronormativity). All items used a 7-point Likert scale ranging from strongly disagree to strongly agree. Following the wording in Altemeyer's (1998) measure of RWA, the midpoint response for each item was "exactly neutral."
Two additional measures were administered in order to establish the validity of the HABS. First, RWA was measured using a 20-item version of Altemeyer's (1998) well-established questionnaire. In Christopher and Mull's (2006) study, Chronbach's alpha for this measure was .95, and D.G. Winter (personal communication, February 23rd, 2007) reported observing alphas well over .90 across multiple studies. Altemeyer's previous versions of this measure have also demonstrated excellent reliability and validity (see Altemeyer, 1988 and 1996). Following Duncan, Peterson, and Winter (1997), participants rated each item using a 7-point scale ranging from strongly disagree to strongly agree. A standardized mean composite score was computed to assess overall RWA tendencies. Second, a 10-item version of Herek's (1994) Attitudes Towards Lesbians and Gays (ATLG) was used to measure heterosexist prejudice directed towards lesbians and gay men. The ATLG limits its evaluation of sexual minorities to two discrete groups (lesbians and gay men), thus neglecting to directly measure attitudes about other sexual minorities, such as bisexuals. However, this measure is well-established in the literature as accurately predicting heterosexist attitudes and behaviors (e.g., Stover & Morera, 2007). Standardized mean composite scores were calculated to assess both attitudes towards lesbians (ATL) and attitudes towards gay men (ATG).
Undergraduate students in the two psychology courses were asked during class time to volunteer for this study. Willing participants stayed to complete the survey. Negatively-worded items on each measure were reverse-scored before calculating scale reliabilities, and these scores were standardized before computing the mean scores that were used in correlational analyses, group comparisons, and regressions.
A Varimax rotated factor analysis of the 38 items in Table 1 revealed 2 factors with Eigenvalues of 9.42 and 5.86, accounting respectively for 24.79% and 15.42% of the variance (the scree plot suggested a 2-factor solution). All items with factor loadings of at least .5 (absolute value) were considered for inclusion in the final scale; the items with the highest loadings on one factor and relatively lowest loadings on the other factor were retained in the analyses that follow. This resulted in a 16-item measure of heteronormativity, comprised of two scales with 8 items each, with balanced negative/positive wording. The scales, labeled Binary Gender and Normative Behavior, reflected the two predicted components of heteronormativity. Chronbach's alpha for the Binary Gender Scale was α = .92, and reliability for the Normative Behavior Scales was α = .78. Sample items loading on the two scales included the following:
As predicted, the HABS correlated significantly with RWA, attitudes towards lesbians, and attitudes towards gay men (see Table 2). This was true for both the Binary Gender sub-scale as well as the Normative Behavior sub-scale.
These findings reveal preliminary support for the validity and reliability of the HABS. Because heteronormative attitudes are theorized as contributing directly to prejudicial attitudes towards lesbians and gays, it was hypothesized that these two measures would correlate significantly. And because RWA and attitudes towards lesbians and gays have been highly correlated in previous studies, it was hypothesized that RWA and heteronormativity would also be highly correlated. Results supporting these hypotheses suggest that the HABS measure and its two subscales have adequate concurrent validity with these closely related constructs. Discriminant validity was not directly tested in this study, and I need to consult with someone more knowledgeable about statistics in order to discern whether the regression analyses reported above suggest that the HABS measure is at least somewhat orthogonal to the constructs of RWA and attitudes toward sexual minorities.
Caution is warranted in the interpretation of group differences in heteronormativity among participants of this study. On the one hand, sample sizes are likely too small to detect significant group differences by gender and sexual minority status. On the other hand, significant group differences observed by racial and ethnic minority status are based on small numbers of people who do not likely represent the diversity of opinions and perspectives within racial and ethnic minority groups, and prediction of outcomes by racial and ethnic minority status becomes nonsignificant when controlling for age and course enrollment. In addition, no intra-group analyses for racial and ethnic minority groups (i.e., African Americans, Latino/as), sexual minority status, or gender were possible due to the small within-cell sample sizes. For these reasons, neither the significant differences by racial/ethnic minority status and sexual minority status, nor the lack of significant differences found when comparing scores by gender, are discussed here.
This study lays a foundation for future investigations of heteronormative attitudes and behaviors using the HABS. Several limitations that could be addressed in subsequent studies are described here. For example, neither religion nor political orientation were measured in this study, and a greater diversity of demographics such as race, ethnicity, age, and education level would help in determining whether the properties observed in this study are generalizable to particular populations. In addition, in order to make sense of any group differences by sexual, racial, or ethnic minority status, these populations should be oversampled to allow for intra-group as well as inter-group analyses.
Discriminant validity was not explored in this study and could be examined in the future by investigating intercorrelations among HABS scores, RWA, and constructs expected to relate to RWA but not necessarily to heteronormative attitudes. For example, attitudes about the natural environment correlate significantly with RWA (e.g., Schultz & Stone, 1994) but would be expected to be somewhat orthogonal to attitudes about sexuality. Future studies could also assess test-retest reliability to determine the stability of individuals' heteronormative attitudes and beliefs as well as the affects of potential interventions aimed at reducing heteronormative assumptions.
During the Winter 2008 semester, I plan to replicate the study described in this paper in order to gain a better understanding of the properties of this new measure. Study participants will be recruited from undergraduate courses, hopefully from courses in different departments such as Women's Studies, Sociology, and Psychology.
In addition to pursuing a better understanding of heteronormativity and the statistical properties of the HABS, future research could use this measure to examine potential causes and consequences of heteronormative attitudes and beliefs. For example, understanding how heteronormativity and sexual orientation relate to one another may help us to make sense of mental health outcomes for lesbians, gay men, bisexual and transgender women and men, and even heterosexuals who subtly or blatantly transgress the rigid expectations that characterize a heteronormative society.
In my dissertation study, I am using the HABS in my investigation of two main research questions. First, how do sexual orientation and gender relate to personality constructs such as right-wing authoritarianism (RWA), tolerance of ambiguity, openness to experience, and heteronormative attitudes and beliefs? And second, how do tolerance of ambiguity, openness to experience, RWA, and heteronormative attitudes and beliefs relate to psychological well-being? With respect to the second question, my dissertation study is also investigating whether sexual orientation (as defined by psychological orientation, behavioral orientation, and self-defined identity) predicts different relationships among the variables. I will also assess fluidity, or the degree to which psychological, behavioral, and identity aspects of sexuality vary, and outness, or the extent to which individuals disclose these three aspects of sexuality to others. Because research participants' understandings of the concepts under investigation may vary, I will ask participants to provide the labels and terms they use to define and describe their experiences and identities in addition to asking closed-ended questions about demographics and sexual orientation. After I complete the data collection phase of this project, the following relevant hypotheses will be tested:
As described above, the problems and consequences of heteronormative attitudes are many; normative expectations of gender and sexual experiences likely affect all those who transgress such norms. And arguably few, if any, individuals always satisfy all of the normative expectations of gender and sexuality. Developing this measure is a preliminary step towards a better understanding of the significance of heteronormativity in our daily lives. And with increased understanding, we may yet, as Yep (2003) proposes, be able to challenge the boundaries of (hetero)sexuality -- to undermine some of the ways in which heterosexuality is created and maintained, to destabilize some of the ways in which gender hierarchies uphold heterosexuality, and to understand sexuality as only one layer in our complex and intersecting identities.
