Abortion is a very controversial topic for conversation today -- in the 21st century -- where it has achieved mainstream visibility in the political sphere. The controversy often revolves around opposing claims of rights and polarized feelings of support for the baby's right to life and thus opposition to abortion or support for the choice of the woman carrying the baby and thus support for abortion. More than a medical option (though not a consistently legal medical option across the States), abortion is an issue involving widespread disagreement over its appropriate level of legislation. Pro-life activists often argue that because it involves the question of life, abortion is a moral issue. In 2004, many voters admitted this issue was singularly used to direct their choice for President of the United States. These voters were subsequently classified as moral voters.
So this begs the question: how far is morality interconnected with abortion? Are these two concepts causally related? In my study, I will be examining whether or not religious attitudes affect personal feelings on abortion. My research question is: Are religious people more likely to be against abortion than non-religious people. My hypothesis is that religious people are more against abortion (pro-life) than non-religious people. I believe religious people view abortion as a cruel and negative thing because they think it is taking the life of a baby whereas non-religious people tend to think of abortion not in terms of the life of the baby but in terms of the mother carrying the baby. They believe abortion is a necessary freedom of choice.
I am interested in how individual opinions of abortion are affected by religious views, so my unit of analysis will be individuals. The two concepts I am studying are religiosity and feelings on abortion. Religious people are my main interest group, so non-religious people are my comparison group. My independent variable is the level of religiosity of my unit (individuals) studied, and feelings on abortion is my dependent variable. My ideal study population would be a representative population of all United States citizens, with a wide distribution of gender, age, class, region, and race. My actual study population is University of Michigan students because they are who I have access to speak with.
To best collect my data for these variables, I chose to use semi-structured individual interviews by approaching individuals in different locations on campus and asking their feelings on abortion and how religious they are. I measured religiosity by asking different questions I thought indicated the level of how religious people are. I measured feelings on abortion by asking their overall view on it and then narrowing to specific circumstances if necessary. I chose this type of interview instead of a structured paper questionnaire because I decided I wanted to involve the respondents more. I wanted them to be able to expand on the extent of their abortion views and religiosity, without being confined to answer sets created by me. Indeed, an advantage of this method is that they could give more explanation so that I could understand their position better than I would have from a survey question. Abortion can be a complicated topic, so it is important to clarify with people the type of abortion they are envisioning and the circumstances they believe are appropriate for it to be legal. Having an open-ended question format also allowed them to demonstrate the salience of the issues in their minds. When they introduced a topic on their own, I could trust it was on the top of their mind whereas if they had circled it as a survey question option, they would not necessarily have cared about it without my drawing attention to it. Disadvantages of this method revolve around the sample. Conducting interviews is time consuming, so I had a small sample size which was also biased from my selection (see below). Another disadvantage came from the coding involved in creating quantitative analysis. Recognizing which parts of their open ended responses classified under my categories was a subjective act that could not always be completely uniform.
My initial plan was to have a sample size of 40 by talking to 5 people in each of 8 locations, however, only 5 locations ended up being successful, so I finished with a sample size of 25. I wanted to draw a sample of students from a wide range of academic backgrounds (because academic study often leans in a political direction) and social identities (because they impact your lens on the world), so I tried to collect data from areas of campus where different academic concentrators would be and in common university areas where a broad mix of students would be. The Union MUG and the Ugli proved to be the most successful for finding respondents. I eventually found enough outside the fishbowl, but I was held up by being told by an employee that I was not allowed to approach people inside. I wanted to talk to people in Beanster's in the League because the Jewish population is known to hang out there (so this would get different faiths for my study) and Espresso Royale on State St because more art and music students hang out there, but when I visited each of these places, everyone was studying, and I did not have the heart to try and interrupt them. Instead, I talked to people eating at the League food court because I had had success at the other common university locations because I approached people who were eating (or reading The Michigan Daily). I successfully talked to students (hopefully science majors) in the Chem building foyer, but I chose not to talk to anyone in the Business school lobby (as originally planned) because I realized the students were mostly MBA students whose age would not match my other respondents'. My last attempt was to talk to people at East Quad (which is known for having a different student population due to the Residential College residing there), but no one was outside because of the cold weather and no one was inside in the lounge (I assume because of finals).
Besides the location factor, I tried to get a sample mixed by gender and race -- which I was successful in obtaining. However, my sample could have been limited (beyond the lack of academic variety discussed above) by my hand selection. I did not talk to anyone I knew because I did not want their knowledge of my positions to color their response. I did not talk to anyone around someone else because I did not want another person's presence to impact their response. While I tried to control bias by establishing a comfortable interviewing environment, my sample was limited because most people were around others -- for study purposes or just socializing. The people in my sample size are those who were out in the public during my collection time, were by themselves and looking open to disruption, were hand selected by me, and who agreed to participate. (I had a few people tell me they did not have time to answer questions or did not want to.)
Besides the drawbacks of my sample, I must note that my study population is far from representing the general US population. I got a racially diverse population, but my small sample size made it impossible to get representatives from each gender in every race. Most respondents were between the ages of 18 and 22. Most respondents came from the middle class or above because you have to have money to come to an institution of secondary education, especially the University of Michigan (which has a tuition similar to that of private schools), and even more so if you have to pay out-of-state tuition. 60% of University students are from the state of Michigan, so my respondent population was skewed with more people from the state of Michigan, a Midwest state, than other states. Because the Midwest is known to be more conservative (especially on moral issues), the sample could have made people more likely to be against abortion, but the University of Michigan is known as a more liberal school, so political leaning might have been balanced, though I cannot say my study represents the beliefs of the majority of the US population.
My informed consent statement was: "By consenting, you have read the information above and consent to participate in the study." My project was confidential versus anonymous because I identified each respondent with a number so that his or her responses could be traced back for an individual analysis if necessary. It remained ethical because I never asked for any personal identification. My study posed no risks except potential personal emotional struggle if respondents had experienced hardship surrounding abortion or religion. One respondent did appear very uneasy when I asked him questions as he took full minutes in between his responses. Other respondents admitted that their current religious affiliation was something they had been struggling with since coming to college. My study could have been more harmful if given to vulnerable subjects such as pregnant women since the subject manner directly relates to them.
I devised an Interview Guide (see appendix) to assist when I individually talked to my respondents for about five minutes each. My operational definition of abortion was: the medical surgery to stop a pregnancy. (This means that self-imposed abortion or attempt to miscarriage is not what I operated from, but was noted if brought up by respondents.) My operational definition of religion was: the belief in supernatural powers in the creation of the universe or influence over destiny. (This means that spirituality was not being considered, yet noted if respondents interpret "religion" that way.) My purpose was to simply discover respondents' feelings on my two concepts and their personal demographic identifications.
I first asked the general, "How do you feel about abortion?". Some respondents appeared confused or asked if I meant "pro-life or pro-choice." In each situation, I replied, "Just your general view." I hoped to see if respondents would note specific situations where the legality of abortion should be assured or circumstances when abortion should definitely be illegal. I left space on my form to record if they noted these things on their own initially. If they did not, I asked if they thought there were specific circumstances for legality or illegality. If they appeared confused, I suggested that some people had said rape.
I used the same procedure for measuring their religiosity: asking how religious they are then narrowing to specifics (attendance at religious services/independent religious study/faith) to get a greater understanding if they were not initially specific. I sometimes clarified with "so you would say you are somewhat religious" to make sure that how I would classify them later was acceptable to them. Because I asked their religiosity directly after I asked their views on abortion, I designated room on my form to note if respondents made justifications about their paradoxical identifications between the concepts. Only a few respondents did. Finally, I asked for their self-identification in the following categories: year in school, gender, age, socioeconomic status, race, and region where they are from. Some respondents were confused because they thought I was asking, "You're in school?" at first. Others said they struggle in designating where they fall along racial or regional lines. I directed: "however you self-identify." An interesting observation if that most respondents thought gender was assumed and gave me a weird look when I asked for their identification (even though sociological theory says that gender should not be assumed because it is socially constructed).
In conducting my interviews, I tried to appear as unbiased as possible. When respondents were talking, I would look down at the paper where I was transcribing to avoid judgment being shown on my face. I maintained a friendly, approachable tone no matter what their responses were. As noted above, I tried to approach respondents in non-threatening environments (when they were alone/not busy) so that they could be as open and truthful as possible. I had created my guide to be semi-structured, but it was interesting because respondents gave fairly structured responses as if they were waiting for me to run down a list of questions. Perhaps this is due to a natural assumption of a structured format when asked to participate in an interview. Consequently, I did not gather a deep understanding of why they held their views on abortion.
My study is limited due to the characteristics of the sample (see above) and the religious identification of respondents. A problem is that I was not consistent in how I asked for specification on legality/illegality issues during the first few interviews. Next time I would be sure to have a set next question in response to their answers. As far as sample, next time I would want to include Jewish and Muslim people, as well as any other different religion to see if other faiths confounded the results. My results are not necessarily reliable because different results might be obtained from talking to people of different faiths -- or simply different individuals. I do, however, believe that my results are valid (though not generalizable to my ideal population) because of the environment of comfort I established in my data collection. Some respondents noted how abortion is an ethical issue surrounded by controversy and disagreement. One guy would not commit to his views until I frankly asked him to. Some respondents admitted that they are not what they would consider "true Christians." The order of my questions, with religiosity after views on abortion, might have caused self-questioning of religious commitment more so than if not asked to commit to a stance on a moral issue. This potentially amounted to respondents feeling the need to give disclaimers, but I still believe honesty was involved overall.
My dependent variable (feelings on abortion) was measured by "abortionlevel." Most respondents (16) felt its legality should depend on the situation, while 1 person thought it should never be legal and 8 felt it should always be legal.
The "otherexception" variable also measured the dependent variable by showing a scale of exceptions for when abortion should be legal, from most negative feelings toward abortion to most positive feelings. It was helpful because respondents were more spread out in their answers:
The "religionlevel" variable measured my independent variable (religiosity) through a scale of responses that were self-identified and/or interpreted by me, the interviewer. 48% of respondents were somewhat religious while 40% were not at all religious:
The confounding variable was age. I later recoded responses to compare "under 20" to "20 or older" to create an approximately even sample for subgroup comparison:
To best compare the relationship between the independent and dependant variables, they were recoded into new variables and compared through crosstabs and correlations. The variable "new abortion measure" was created from an "otherexception" recode of "strict on exceptions" versus "liberal on exceptions." The "religionlevel" variable was recoded so that "not religious" was compared to any identification of religion: "religious in some sense." (see codebook in appendix)
The crosstab shows that the majority of religious people (53%) and the majority of not relgious people (60%) were both more liberal on abortion. My hypothesis was that more religious people would be more against abortion than non-religious people, and this is shown to some extent (47% v. 40%), but the relations of the independent and dependant variables had only a weak correlation at -.066. My hypothesis was proven correct, but only slightly and not to a significant amount:
I also measured the effect of confounders. By layering the "abortion measure" v "religion recode" table with "younger v older" (the age variable recoded), I found that abortion views differed on whether respondents were under 20 or older:
75% of the "not religious" respondents who were under 20 had liberal views on abortion, while only 50% of the "20 or older" did. Of the religious respondents, 62.5% of those under 20 held stricter views on abortion while only 28.6% of the older religious people did. This shows that the aggregate relationship between religiosity and views on abortion differs when you single out age. My overall findings showed that religious people had slightly more negative views toward abortion whereas here, only the younger religious people had more negative views toward abortion. The difference was due to age, not religiosity.
My study population is limited because the demographics of students at the University of Michigan do not relate to the demographics of the country as a whole, because my sample was not representative of all religious views, and because my sample was small in size. My results do show a support for my hypothesis, but only slightly. More religious people were against abortion than were non-religious people, but only through a weak correlation. Age was also shown to be confounding. To better generalize these results, I would have to interview more people with more varied social identities. I wish I had been uniform in asking their specifics for the extent of legality from the start. If I were going to do more research on this topic (besides having a larger and more representative sample size), I would like to explore political party identification as another possible confounding variable.
