I will not address these questions strictly distinctly, and will instead attempt to deal with them in a single critical response. I will conduct a critique of a theoretical tradition (per Q.II), then I will utilize the discussion presented and attempt to define principal parameters or concepts for a new sociological theory (per Q. VI).
Almost three years ago, the United States army invaded Iraq. It is estimated that more than 33,000 Iraqis have died as a result of the U.S. invasion and subsequent occupation of Iraq. This tragic context raises the need to inquire into the phenomenon of societal conquest-imperialism on the move, at large. Here, I will attempt to modestly (and in much truncated form) take a step towards addressing this effort by examining (and critiquing) Karl Marx's perspectives on imperialism.
I have chosen to examine Marx's thoughts on imperialism because his writings on the subject are instructive to us in two key ways. First, Marx demonstrates how imperialism came about as a system of global domination and the way in which it effects subjugated societies. And second, Marx unwittingly shows, through his writings on British rule in India, how arguments for imperialism as a means for emancipation are invariably flawed.
Marx himself never uses the term imperialism , but implies the concept in many of his writings. Therefore, the majority of theorists of imperialism claim to be furthering his ideas (Wolfe 1997: 389).
Marx indicates that overseas expansion -- the development of the world market and the conquest of cheap sources of raw materials -- is a natural outgrowth of capitalism, of competition between the bourgeoisie:
Marx writes that bourgeois wealth in the more advanced capitalist countries of Europe, was accumulated through the plunder of the peoples of the New World, the profits of plantations based on slave labor, the looting of the colonies' treasures:
Capitalism shows its true colors in the conquered societies, he says:
Marx points out that the bourgeoisie use imperialism to stave off a proletariat revolution:
According to Marx, imperialism allows the levy of the most grotesque costs of capitalism on conquered societies, therefore allowing the bourgeoisie to lessen the burdens on the proletariat of their own societies. He reiterates this point in a letter to Engels dated 1858, suggesting that through imperialism the bourgeoisie could defeat a proletariat revolution at home:
It is in the light of the foregoing that Marx interprets the effects of British imperial rule on Ireland. First, Marx argues that Ireland's poverty and misery was caused by English oppression and exploitation. The following piece serves as a good example:
Second, Marx notes the ameliorative effects for English workers of English rule on Ireland. He suggests that until Ireland gains its independence, English workers will be unable to progress towards a proletariat revolution:
Marx was appalled at the suffering that British rule forced on the Irish, and thought that British rule in Ireland served only to preserve a supply of industrial labor for British factories. For Marx, the effect of British rule on Ireland was regressive.
Note that Marx sees imperialism as a natural consequence of capitalism. Imperialism performs the necessary function of providing the bourgeoisie with a world market for their products.
Marx shows how through imperialism the bourgeoisie are able to improve living and working conditions for the proletariat in their home societies, and therefore, stave off revolution. These effects are made possible by the ruthless exploitation of the peoples of, and the expropriation of natural resources from, conquered societies.
As noted, Marx concludes that British rule had an entirely negative effect on Ireland. However, when his focus shifts to India, his stance differs. For Marx, the ultimate effect of British rule in India was positive. It is here that Marx is unwittingly instructive to us by demonstrating how arguments for imperialism as a means to emancipation are fundamentally flawed.
Marx argues that in India, British imperialism was ultimately a good thing. The crucial building block in Marx's argument about British rule in India is his assertion about an "Asiatic" mode of production. He indicates that the Asiatic mode of production is a highly dubious form of social organization. In his time-line of social evolution, he illustrates the "Asiatic" mode of production as representing a primitive, or undeveloped stage of human society:
Marx posits that the Asiatic mode of production does not develop in a way that leads to further stages, but tends to persist unless disrupted from outside. He sees British imperial rule in India as providing just the sort of disruption needed for Indian society to abandon its passivity and finally evolve:
Marx sees British rule's 'regenerating' impulses coming in the form of modernizing and integrating factors being introduced in India, the foremost of which is capitalism, and which included:
Marx also speaks of the intense misery inflicted by the British in India, a result of their breaking down the entire framework of Indian society (Marx and Engels 1978: 658). Says Marx:
Yet, he still believes that British rule in India advantageously broke up the undignified, stagnatory, and vegetative life of the passive existence of the inhabitants of India (Marx and Engels 1978: 658). It is in this context that Marx remarks:
In summary, Marx argues: British rule in India causes misery, but because India is a backward society, British rule is necessary in order to kick India forward. On closer examination, the planks of Marx's argument: a) India is a "backward" society, and b) England can kick India "forward," reveal themselves to be dogmatic abstractions.
Writing within a tradition of critical humanism, which in many ways he himself develops, Edward Said provides a significant critique of Marx. Said writes in Orientalism,
In other words, the sort of alterity that we notice in Marx's "Asiatic" mode of production is not natural or inherent, but produced.
Said asserts that Orientalism is not simply a scholarly project initiated to gain more accurate knowledge of a real object -- the Orient -- but rather a discourse that creates its own object in the unfolding of the discourse itself. He suggests that Marx had easy access to a massed body of writing -- both internally consolidated by Orientalism and put forward by it beyond the field -- that controlled any statement made about the Orient. The idea of a fundamentally lifeless Asia -- a backward India -- is a piece of Romantic Orientalism that Marx encounters in this material. The idea works to confirm Marx's thesis about the inevitability of capitalism, and so Marx uses it and generates a justification for British imperialism in India (Said 2003: 153-156). What happened to Marx's lauded "kritik" during this intellectual process? One cannot say, except that it is notably absent, forcing Marx to produce an un-informed, ill-conceived, and ultimately destructive notion of a backward India.
In their book Empire, Hardt and Negri, deploy new-left critical theory to show how Marx's second plank -- England will kick India "forward" -- is based on Euro-centric dogma (2001: 118-120). Hardt and Negri note that for Marx, the only way forward for India is down the path that European society has already traveled, because for Marx all history is defined by European history -- all that happened in Europe must happen everywhere (ibid.). And to the extent that the trajectory of European history is not repeated, it is not only acceptable but also necessary that tyranny -- in the form of imperialism -- bring it everywhere. Therefore, for Marx the only way India can progress is by being transformed into a Western society. Hardt and Negri note that this is a Euro-centric position, showing a lack of understanding of and appreciation for Indian society and its different potentials (ibid.).
A third strand of critical theorists -- Dependency theorists -- Andre Gunder Frank and Paul Baran prominent among them, further demonstrate how the second plank supporting Marx's stance on British rule in India -- England will kick India "forward" -- is anchored in erroneous assumptions (Wolfe 1997: 394-397). They illustrate that the uni-linear theory of history that Marx posits, does not take into account that, when the West was undergoing its own momentous development, there had not been another "West" present (ibid.). Rather, there were colonies whose exploitation produced (and in changing ways continues to produce) the paramountcy of the West. They show that underdevelopment is not external to capitalism, i.e. it is not a condition that prevails in backward regions that have yet to develop, but that in fact, it is a result of capitalism. Therefore, they assert that regardless of Marx's ill-conceived "Asiatic" mode of production, the idea that India would develop (let alone progress) as a result of the modernization fostered by British rule is fundamentally implausible because development and underdevelopment are not two distinct states, but are bound together in a cause and effect relationship -- the ascendancy of British capital was built on the subjugation of India (ibid.).
Therefore, we note that Marx's apologetic support for British rule in India is based on his belief that through British imperialism Indian society will achieve progress. Indeed, quite paradoxically, Marx's support for British rule in India stems from his desire to witness the emancipation of Indian society. In other words, Marx makes the "imperialism as means to emancipation" argument with regards to British rule in India. However, close examination of Marx's argument reveals that it is built upon un-informed and ill-conceived assumptions of the backwardness of Indian society, and a doctrinaire, Euro-centric theoretical framework through which Marx invariably analyzes history. Therefore, Marx has been unwittingly instructive to us in illustrating the ease of falling into the trap of making the "imperialism as means to emancipation" argument, as well as highlighting its fundamental flaws -- it is based on assumptions and notions that do not withstand the scrutiny of three significant strands of critical theory.
An examination of Marx's thoughts on imperialism illustrates that his argument with respect to it is founded on an underlying notion of progress. Dipesh Chakrabarty notes that this notion of progress lies at the root of the narrative of "modernity." In Habitations of Modernity, Chakrabarty writes, "If modernity is to be a definable, delimited concept, we must identify some people or practices or concepts as nonmodern......Western powers in their imperial mode saw modernity as coeval with the idea of progress." (2002, xix)
Post-modern theory, best embodied in the works of Foucault and Jameson, utilizes critiques like the one presented above (on Marx and imperialism) to teach us an important lesson about how this concept -- progress -- is problematic. And it then asks us to jettison "modernity."
But Dipesh Chakrabarty provides a crucial addendum. Chakrabarty first notes in Provincializing Europe,
In other words, there is a difference between holding up humanistic principles, and acting upon them, and one can critique someone who shows a discrepancy between these two. True, for the colonized, the tension between "humanism-as-history," and "humanism-as-ideality," is problematic. But he then points out that conflating the two and then rejecting the conflated bundle would be tantamount to the age-old cliché of "throwing the baby out with the bath water." Chakrabarty continues,
Based on the foregoing discussion, I think that two principal parameters or concepts of a new sociological theory would be, a) non-teleological, non-uni-linear progress, and b) mitigated agency. The first allows us to differentiate between states of being and existence and note whether oppression or denial of justice is occurring, whilst at the same time allowing for differential patterns of evolution. And the second gives us the cognitive room to escape, or change such situations and circumstances, whilst at the same time recognizing our limitations. Without the noted caveats on these concepts we run the risk of defeating our purposes by not being reflexive enough, but going without these concepts wholesale, we run the risk of abject apathy. This might be a treacherous and steep path to tread, but given the alternatives, it is, in my mind at least, a noble, worthy, indeed imperative one because it allows us to develop the contours of that other world which is better, and in so doing, make it all the more possible.
