Older people usually consider young people of our generation as more lazy and more self- centered than young people of their own generation. Even though the origin of this belief is easy to understand in individualistic countries, I find it difficult to accept the idea that people nowadays don't give enough time to helping their communities.
Indeed, I think that modern societies offer more structures and organization to allow people to help the community indirectly. For instance, systems such as the social security system in France allow workers to help indirectly the people needing health care by paying taxes. If this idea do not seem to apply directly to young people, once again we can argue that young people are indirectly helping their communities. For instance, when they spend time working for school in order to get the needed skills to eventually find a job and contribute to the wealth of the country.
Some people would argue on the other hand that government of modern societies do not offer enough to the people who still need individual help, not only in term of money, but mostly in term of time. An example could be the lack of volunteers for the care of retired people needing personal help. If one approach consists in blaming the people having free time, like the young people, for their selfishness, and alternative attitude can be to look at who helps, and who doesn't help to change the situation. Modern societies probably reached this point of no-return where people got used to rely on the government for social issues. Therefore its seem reasonable to give more credits to the people who actually act on the government - by the power of voting, by protesting, or taking part in the political life - so that social issues become a major concern.
As a conclusion, they are different way of helping a community, and we can find, depending on the culture or the country, specific groups of young people who actually give time to make something useful, either by working hard at school, or by voting.
