I agree with the statement 'Young people enjoy life more than older people do.' There were two main reason for agreeing this statement. They were 'variation of choice' and 'passionate'.
For the first reason, young people can have more choice than older people do. Usually older people have less opportunity than young people have because of their age and also they have bad health than young do. Also when older get hurt, they are recovered slower than young do because of soldier's cells are too old reproduce themselves. This cause soldier's choices became limited. For example, oldies cannot ride a ski or snow board as youth people do dangerous trick because they have more risk than young riders have.
For the second reason is related with passionate. Young people usually have more passion than old people do. For the reason of this, it is because of hormones and the different amount of experience. Old people have less hormones than young guys have and hormones is one of scientific catalyst that made exciting to the brain. For the result of this, even if young and old people do sex with a same situation, their excitement are different because of amount of hormones.
For passionate, amount of experience also affect a lot. Usually beginner has more exciting than veteran does. For example of this, when two different type of people have same girl friend, the amount of exciting are different between ladies guy and the person who never had girl friend because ladies guy already has experience about having girl friend. This relationship does not change a lot between old people and young people because old people usually have more experience than youth people have.
Old people can also enjoy the life, but young people usually can get more exciting or joylessness from same activities. They caused from a lot of reason and some of them based on scientific data and psychological data. However, this doesn't mean old people can't enjoy their life even if the excitements is different with youth group, they still can enjoy their life.
