In my little community all the volunteers working and helping the others are mainly adults and old people. Therefore, my experience gives evidence to the statement that young people nowadays do not give enough time to helping their communities.There are many explanations for this to happen.
Today young people are involved in various activities: after having being to school, they have many homework and they are also involved in sports and other leisure activities. Therefore, they have no time to be more involved in their communities. Often this happens because of their parents, which prefer their sons to be working more for their individual future that for the future of the community as a whole. In my case, I have been always asked to spend more time learning languages and playing sports rather than working as a volunteer for the community.
Another motivation for this low involvement in the community is the growing lack of interest from the society itself for young involved in social works. In particular, the school does not provide stimuli to involve the students in this kind of projects. In my high school, for example, only the 4 % of the students spent time helping their communities. A good idea could be, in my opinion, the distribution of school credits for every hour of social work in the community of origin. Furthermore the government does not provide enough information on the matter: with the introduction of volunteer`s information points in the cities and with the distribution of advertisements, the number of young people involved in the community can grow easily.
To conclude, I believe that it is true that the young people is not involved enough in their communities, and my personal experience provides a good example. The main causes of this are, in my opinion, the lack of time available to them and the lack of a correct information on the mutual benefits of an higher involvement. I think that mainly with the help of my school, I should find more time to help the community where I live, to improve it and to improve myself.
