We can see many advertisements in our life. On TV, magazine, newspaper and even we can see on a street through the window. Do these advertisements make people to buy the product? Absolutely yes, because most of them make products seem much better than they really are. I have three reasons why and how advertisements makes products seem better ; advertisements show only good thing, they use popular person as a model and they repeat same things.
First of all, advertisements show only good things. They nave show negative things. For example, there is a computer. This computer is very ency and looks good however the function is very limited and it has small memories. Would the advertisement of this computer say that it has limited function and small memories? It would show only good things and overstate about it however it would not mention about bad things. People don't know about negative things and know only good things so they may think products are very good.
Second, they use popular person as a model to attract people. Many advertisements use popular stars in spite of paying huge amount of money. People think they can be similar with the model as they use the product. For example, models of clothes' advertisements are all pretty and skinny, because people think if they wear the clothes they can be as pretty as them.
Last of all, they are repeated so people remind the product anytime. Same advertisements are repeated. Sometimes, I saw same advertisement for more than 10 times a day. Although at first time I just passed the advertisement, however later I was interest in the advertisement and the product. Advertisement repeat same state and action so make people agree with them.
For these reasons, advertisements make products seem much better than they really are so make people buy products. In my opinion we should be careful with these advertisements to not buy that we are not necessary. Advertisement is just an advertisement. We can enjoy to see it, however we should not believe all what they say.
