I strongly subscribe to the statement and support the thought that, in twenty years there will be fewer cars in use than there are today. The reasons that I agree with this statement are detailed in the following passages.
In recent years, improvements in manufacturing technology has ushered a hoard of car manufacturing companies. For example, economically and technologically developed countries, like the United States of America, have witnessed a growing automobile industry in the late 1980s. This growth in the automobile industry linked with increased consumer spending power and lower interest rates on loans resulted in millions of cars being produced and sold yearly. Further, globalization has spread this market worldwide and the recent Asian development has seen addition of more cars to the already large number.
However, this growth comes with a debilitating factor. Earth has a constant pool of resources, which all human have to share. Due the sharp growth in the number of cars and other transportation modes, the petroleum resources are under great stress. There has been great emphasis on alternate fuel sources and transportation modes. Many companies and Governments have initiated technology programs seek solutions to the current problem.
As the old saying goes, "Necessity is the mother of all inventions", humanity will be able to surface above this problem with ingenuity and innovation. There are efforts already in the direction of mass air transportation systems which would make cars redundant. New energy sources have been discovered to support air transportation, and corporations such as Airbus are already dreaming of providing individualistic air transport solutions. This would greatly improve transportation speed and availability.
In conclusion, I would like to use examples from the great visionary of science fiction, Arthur C. Clarke, who said that there shall be personalized air/ space travel modules available by the third millennium, and we wouldn't waste time building roads through air for our cars! And hence, there shall be no need for cars in twenty years from now.
