We often hear complaints from the older generations that the younger generation is spoiled and selfish, lacking the altruistic nature to helping the society around them. Although it is indeed true for some young people, I believe that it is a little far- fetched to presume that all young people do not spend enough time for helping out with community works in general.
To begin with, many schools have actively adopted various programs to encourage, or even require students to join in volunteer works. For example in Korea, it is mandatory for junior high students to do certain hours of community work, and submit documentary evidence in order to graduate. I had to help out in a local nursing home for 30 hours to meet the requirement. Even in colleges, your voluntary work can be acknowledged as credit. Some may argue that such participation is not genuine and self- motivated, nonetheless, it is true that adoption of such policy indeed has increased participation of young people in community works.
Moreover, it is not just the changes in school policy that made young people participate in helping their communities. The growing awareness of social responsibility among business corporations is what also drives social participation of the young people. More and more companies are actively organizing public campaigns and voluntary camps to help the communities, calling many young people to participate in such programs. Many companies, such the well- known Samsung, organize community volunteer work programs for their newly recruited employees to participate. Other companies run volunteer programs that their teenage customers can participate in, such as in the successful case of 'Rainbow Club' run by SK Telecom.
To summarize, people, as well as companies, are not solely judged by financial or academic success they are making as in the past, but also by the amount of social contribution. Such changing notion has motivated the young people's more active participation. I personally believe that young people nowadays are actively involved more than ever, and will continue to do so as long as this trend continues.
