I totally agree with students should understand the ideas and concepts rather learning about facts, because getting idea or concept on a particular task leads them to analyses about the concept and think about its advantage and disadvantages and how it works and finally how it can be manipulated.
Learning about the fact is important but its not that important as understanding an idea because learning a fact is something perceptual that is we can come to conclusion what we learn out of the fact after the incident took place recently ar in the past but in case of getting an idea or concept we can ourselves analyses the end result.
Once in our university we had a chemistry class on various types of chemical substances their usage and their harmful effects. Many of the students were not concentrating on the class. And few were listening but not trying to get the exact matter what the professor was discussing. And they were minding their own ways and the professor announced we are going to have a practical lab assignment next Monday and the class dispersed.
When the class met on next Monday we all were in the chemistry lab for our lab assignment. Many students were a bit worried that they did not pay attention in the class last Friday but if they are not going to complete the assignment they will be loosing the grades. And most of the students were worried but out of fear students started practicals out of their previous knowledge and after some time there was an unfortunate incident which happened in the lab there was a huge explosion in the lab and the group of students who were performing the experiment and few besides them got injured slightly. But finally they recovered after a week that was good part though.
So no one can ever say we can learn out of the the fact after such a unfortunate happening.
Thus i believe its better to get to know about the idea and concept for a student not only in few matters but if he gets to know the concept that will remain in his brain forever. Not only regarding subject but also in other worldly matters understanding concept plays a vital role.

