The traditional cars, which are being used today use petroleum, which is a non renewable source of energy for their functioning. It is a well known fact that the petroleum reserves are limited and are fast drying up. But i feel that this and the eventual exhaustion of petrol in future does not prevent the cars being used.

Scientists world over have worked extensively to find a solution to the above said problem and have come up with some practical and feasible ideas of having cars that run on "alternative energy sources". By "alternative energy sources", we mean those energy forms which are not conventionally used. Newer and advanced methods are being discovered to power the "concept cars".
The use of fuel cells, which release energy by the combination of hydrogen and oxygen is not only a potential source, but also renewable in the sense that it uses alcohol, obtained by plant decomposition as fuel and give out water as bi product. Though this concept is still in infancy, regarding the safety parameters, few cars designed to test these cells have given positive results and hope.
Recently, in the Europe, a car which runs on rechargeable batteries, using electricity for recharging was under demonstration. This electricity driven car is not only being used in other parts of the globe, but is also being recommended as it is echo- friendly. Unlike the exhaust gases from a petrol driven car, this car produces absolutely zero bi products.
The other inventions being done in these lines are the "solar battery" driven car and those which have a combination of more than one of these sources. The prime related area where statistics are being worked out is to see the efficiency, safety and the unit cost when such cars are under mass production.
Hence, whether the petrol reserves dry up or not i personally feel that the cars which run on the above said energy sources will without doubt replace the petrol driven car and see to it that cars are used as much as they are being used today and who knows, even larger in number.
