I agree with the statement, although I believe there are arguments for and against this statement.
First, if a student learns only facts, then it can be especially difficult for them to apply their knowledge to a practical situation. For example, a pharmacist who knows everything about chemical formulas might find difficulty trying to suggest to a customer what medicine to take, because they lack the understanding of ideas and concepts necessary. A student who understands the ideas and concepts can learn the facts necessary for their job through experience and trial and error. Whereas, a student who knows only facts will find it much more difficult to learn ideas and concepts through practical situations.
However, students must obviously know facts, otherwise their understanding of ideas and concepts can't be used. Using the earlier example, a pharmacist who has no knowledge of facts but a complete understanding of ideas and concepts will not be able prescribe a correct medicine to a customer, because without knowing chemical and medical facts, they would not be able to even guess what medicine to advise.
Another example of why understanding ideas is more important than facts can be seen in the way languages were taught years ago. Many teachers forced their students to learn only verb tables; for example, my grandmother can repeat verbs in French, but has no idea what they mean or how to use them. If she understood the ideas and concepts, such as grammar and sentence structure, she might be able to create sentences in French. However, without this understanding, her factual knowledge is useless. Therefore, we can see that understanding concepts is more important than learning just facts.
In summary, learning just facts is pointless if the student does not also learn the ideas and concepts behind these facts. However, obviously, this does not mean that a student can learn only concepts and ideas; they require a balance of facts and understanding in order to apply and use what they learn.
