I think it is important for students to understand ideas and concepts than learn facts. There are several reasons why I think that way.
The first reason is that in our current classrooms we mostly emphasize lecture and forced to memorize certain facts rather than to understand them. When we ask students if they learn something their response will be yes however, they can not apply their knowledge to a new situation. They can not transfer their knowledge, when they faced with a different problem they can not use their knowledge, the reason is that they just memorized those isolated facts. They can only use in the same format they can not make connections. Different situations are challenging for them and if the format have changed everything seems different to them. Eleventh they have lots of information they can not use them. Highly educated people become illiterate.
The second reason why I think we should emphasize to understanding is that you can learn something but does it means that you understand it. For example you you can teach a kid how to tie but can you not teach them to understand something. The only think that you can do is that generate an environment where they can learn and understand something. In an environment like that they can experience the richness of using their knowledge and earn satisfaction with competing a task.
The last reason I want to mention is that the direction of education is emphasizing understanding rather learning facts. Of course we should also use facts but not as we use now. What we did right now is giving tons of information. We see students as computer or store place and store all the information in their brains. Most of the students dislike physics algebra and core science classes because they do not understand it. If we want scientifically literate citizens, who can judge the situation and can make plausible chose we need change our education system and have students understand ideas and concepts. Otherwise we might have students with full of informations who can not use them. I do not think that is what we want from them.
