I neither completely agree nor disagree with the statement that that there will be fewer cars in use than there are today. It might be dependent on various factors. Advancements in research work related to automobile technology and development of an alternative synthetic fuel could have a bearing on this, apart from others.
There is a wide spread concern over the environmental problems caused due to the automobiles. That's why it has been said that nothing can make the world come to a common platform than environmental problems as they are global in nature. So, much of the present research is on developing pollution- free vehicles and also on developing a synthetic fuel. Certain phenomenon like adsorption of liquefied Hydrogen gas on a suitable adsorbent can become a solution for this. This usually means the fuel , the adsorbent and other equipment need to be carried along with the vehicle which usually require some additional space. Due to obvious reasons that much space cannot be be devoted to fuel in two- wheels but can be done in cars. So assuming that research work bears fruit in another ten years or so we can say that it triggers an increase in the number of cars and decrease in the number of two- wheels.
But if the research mentioned in the above paragraph is not fruitful, it might actually trigger a change in the opposite direction i.e, a decrease in the number of cars. There are already problems related to traffic in many places and there is no denying of the fact that each year many new vehicles hit the road. The roads cannot be expanded for ever to tackle this increase in the number of vehicles. People might then be forced to resort to two- wheels as they require less amount of space.
Also some others factors may play a prominent role like increase in the average incomes of the people. This means that they would go for cars because of luxury and other reasons. Improvement in particular technologies related to car and other vehicles which determine their prices might also play an important role .So only time will tell what actually happens.
