For nearly every product some kind of advertisement can be found. Today there are so many different kinds of advertisements, that the question is hard to answer. I think one should distinguish between the most common forms of advertisement which are tv- and radio spots, advertisement in magazine , advertisement on posters in the streets , product placement in movies and direct advertisement by the salesman.
All these forms have one thing in common: Only the favorable aspects of the product will presented.
From that point of view one could admit to the given statement.
TV-spots for example also have the possibility to evoke several emotional reactions by using touching pictures in combination with music. In a less effective way print- and radio- advertisement can be used for that effect, too. This is a very subtle aspect of advertisement. Product placement and tv-spots can also tempt the consumer to associate several properties with the product which are not mentioned directly but associated with the persons, using the product. With respect to all these facts one still has to consider, that a consumer usually never obtains wrong information. One should always be aware of these emotional instruments in advertisement. We always have the option to consult other sources for more information about a product. Advertisement will only show us the positive aspects of the products. Considering the argument above I do not agree with the statement , that advertisement makes products seem much better than they really are ! In fact advertisements is an not complete information .Only by assuming that the product has no disadvantages the consumer may consider a product to be better than it actually is. But this is the consumers fault, who evaluates a product although having incomplete information about it. The purpose of advertisements always is to demonstrate the benefits a product provides never to provide complete information. We should keep that in mind and remember it next time we watch tv or read a magazine !
