There is an opinion that it is better to have broad knowledge of many academic subjects than to specialize in one specific subject. As far as I'm concerned, I believe that this issue should be evaluated in the certain context.
Having a broad range of knowledge subjects, we will get exposure to a variety of knowledge fields, which will prepare us with some universal knowledge which are necessary for any further research.
Also, the access to a wide range of study subjects will help us to foster a good thinking mode to reason the any academic issue from a high- level perspective before we go any further. However, the knowledge the learner get through this way may not be much substantial at the cost of the wide range.
Specific subject, on the other hand, will benefit the learner, with an in-depth knowledge and skill sets, which are critical to explore in the certain field and to get substantial understanding of the major he works on. Only with intensive training in the specific subject, one could be expected to make impressive achievement in this field.
Comparing the advantages and characteristics of the broad knowledge and specific subject, we can tell that they help people in different ways. As a result, the focus on the different sides of these two study modes varies accordingly to the studying period the learner is in. For instance, if a person is a beginner, it is necessary to instill him with a wide range of knowledge, such as philosophy, geometry and math, etc. Only through the extensive learning, he can build himself a well- prepared platform for any further research.
In another circumstance, If the learner is already well equipped with a broad range of knowledge and does know where his academic interest and strength lie in. The specific subject learning should kick in. Since he needs , at this time of period, the solid specific subject knowledge to propel , even accelerate his research in certain academic field, rather than staying in the phase of exposing to a broad range of knowledge as much as possible.
