I would like to respond to this question by saying that I strongly agree with the statement presented. In my opinion, most advertisements do, indeed, make products seem much better than they truly are. I would like to back up my opinion by introducing several arguments, ranging from the tremendous expansion of the advertising industry to such common examples as McDonald's.
In the past years, the advertising industry has grown faster than almost any other industry. If the quality of many goods was as amazing as often claimed by its producers, such a huge amount of promotion would not be necessary. The most popular example is the fast rise of the search engine Google, which generates tremendous amounts of money from its advertising activities. This helped the founders of Google to become two of the riches people in the world in a remarkably short period of time.
In its frequent advertising campaigns, McDonald's claims that its products are not only delicious but also very healthy. Scientific studies, however, have found that the so-called 'fast food culture' is one of the most significant reasons for the enormous increase in overweight people in the United States. Unfortunately, many people are not aware this is not only a problem for the individuals themselves but will also have devastating effects on society as a whole, given the large amount of health costs these people will produce.
Another example of misleading advertisements are the spots procured by the banking industry. Many large investment bank promise prospective clients less risk or higher returns that can be achieved by investing in secure assets like government bonds. However, the burst of the internet bubble in the year 2000 and the subsequent bear market in stocks has shown that none of those high- profile financial institutions was able to life up to their promises.
In conclusion, the recent growth of the advertising industry and the promotion campaigns of several household names such as McDonald's clearly prove that advertisements make products seem much better than they really are and often provide prospective customers with misleading information.
