I agree with the statement that young people do not give enough time to helping their communities. Previously young people were interested in issues about their communities. However, as the time goes by, as the technology develops young people start getting interested more with their own issues. Integration of modernization and technology can be a reason for this change of interest. Thus these two can be responsible for the decreasing time that is spent for helping the communities.
First of all, the world is changing in a way that people are getting lonelier. For example, most of the people, both mothers and fathers, are working now. Children are left alone at home during the working hours and this makes the children to learn to live by his own. This results in children only thinking themselves and children interested in their own issues. In the long term being alone leads to a society composed of young people who are isolated from the world, only sharing their inner worlds with the people like them. Thus as a result of this modernization in the society, working parents, living in a big city, leads young people to be individualistic.
Another reason for the decrease in help of young people to their communities is the development in technology. The development in technology also leads young people to live isolated from the world. As I described above, the children left home alone play computer and video games. They all have some kind of virtual characters and they are much more concerned with their vital characters rather than their community. Young people nowadays have more problems regarding themselves than the young people of the past. Thus, they are helping themselves before they try to help their communities.
To conclude, with the modernization which leads to loneliness and the developments in the technology which increases the loneliness are the main reasons for young people to behave individualistically. This behavior prevents young people to give enough time to helping their communities.
