"Old is gold" but i don't agree with that. Young people enjoy more than the older one because they are more enthusiastic, hot -blooded and strong determination besides that old people have many problems like, they have responsibility, disease etc.
Young people are more enthusiastic. They are called building stone of a country.The more number of young people in country , more strong the country is. The strengthen of any country can be recognized by its number of young people.Young people have strong determination and can enjoy every part of life. They can be adjusted to any environment easily. They can do lot of fun and can enjoy adventurous life like they can do para- gliding, para- sailing , river- rafting, trekking etc which is impossible for the older people.
Young people are hot- blooded means they are very keen to do anything they want, so this also implies their determination of doing things.Young people have a good resistance power of resisting disease so they can eat everything they like.
Psychological says old people also wants to enjoy their life but they cant because of many problems which appear on them due to old age. By walking a few distance they get tired so how can they are going to trek and all that things. The old people doesn't have a good resistance power they fall prey if they eat anything outside what that is suggested by the doctor. So they cant travel places to places to explore the world as at different places they cant get the food that is prescribed to them.They also cant adjust to climate.They also cant resist long traveling.
Young people, for example go to pubs, disco,enjoy the night life of the city, can ride on a motorcycle through out the city while old people cant even imagine do that, they just sit at home and enjoy the TV. The TV is only the entertainment source for them.
If The old people even try to enjoy they have to enjoy at their home only.So there is very little space to enjoy for the old people while young people can enjoy through out the world.
