I mainly agree with that statement.
I think it is obvious that advertisements make products seem better than they really are, because this is what advertisements are there fore. The aim of advertisements is to make people buy the product. To succeed best in this, advertisements have to make the product seem as good as possible. Now it is clear, that with some technical support, it is quite easy to make a product seem better than it actually is. For example, advertisements often use very bright and shining colors, but if you compare the product with the picture, the real colors are much more 'normal'.
Furthermore, advertisements often use graphics, tables or words that appear scientific to make the product seem more special, but if you know a bit about the facts displayed, you realize that they only tell very common things any other similar product also has.
Apart from making the products seem better, advertisements also use psychological means to make people buy the product. Especially, they often try to implicitly convey a message without letting the customer really be conscious about it. For example a laughing person on a photo makes people think using this product makes them happy. Or they try to make it plausible to people that they absolutely need this product because they belong to a certain goop. So advertisements often specialist to reach a distinct group of people like young parents, elderly women or middle- aged men.
However, I think, sometimes advertisements can also help to make a new product known or to inform people about special qualities a specific product has and how it can serve them. From a customer's point of view, I think a middle way is best: One should not completely mistrust advertisements because they can really draw one's attention to something useful, but on the other hand one should neither trust them blindly. From my experience I think it is best to either try the product, so you know if you want to buy it again or not, or ask someone who has already tried it for advice.
