Although, in first appearance it seems young people enjoy life more than older people do, when I think a little bit i decide this idea is wrong. I think older people especially above 50 ages are having a more pleasure with living against to young people because older people generally have better economic conditions and more freedom to make enjoying activities.
Older people will have better economic opportunities for making a lot of social activities which are making people life enjoyable. For example, when we look the tourism tours around the world we can observe older people are more than younger people because older people generally after resting have a good economic conditions to realize their plans for getting more enthusiasm from life but when we observe younger people we can easily see that most of the young people have not this type of opportunities because they are still taking money from their parents.
In addition to economic conditions, older people also have much more freedom or time to getting enjoy with life. First of all generally older people don't have to have their parents permission before deciding a social activity. They are nearly completely free. They can go where they want they can see what they want to see. Old people have also more experience than young people so they can know people and their qualifications better than younger people. And by using their experience they can do what they want more freely according to young people. When we think young people, we can easily observe that most of them are not free. Their decisions mostly depends on their parents, their wife, and even their jobs.
In the last, I can assert that older people have a better quality life according to the younger people, i can say that they are living their second spring of their life and everybody knows that two every time is bigger than one so, they will evaluate their time more joyful because of their life liberty and economic states. Being old is not the end, it is a new start.
