I agree that in twenty years there will be fewer cars in use than there are today.
The first reason why I think the number of cars are decreasing is that oil price are increasing sharply. Researchers are saying that the fossil resources such as coal, oil, natural gas are being depleted every year. Moreover, the economy of China is booming up since late of 90's, and oil demands are sharply increased because China buys considerable amount of oil all over the world.
If oil becomes expensive, people don't drive a car and instead they try to use public transportation. Therefore, high oil price results in fall of demanding cars, and these kind of trends becomes general, the number of cars are decreasing.
The second reason is that more countries are concerned about environmental problem and believe that cars produces some hazard materials. Environment problem has been issued by international society such as UN and international environment organization such as WTO. Therefore some government would lead to make the number of cars decrease and it would affect to the number of cars.
The research of substitute resource would lead to the same result. As far as I know, substitute resource that applied to modern transportation is only electricity. Nuclear is too dangerous to use for transportation and the other resources is still on going research. By the way, if electricity resource for individual transportation is used in daily life, that means people can not afford to pay oil price and car battery would be used. But it is very uncomfortable to charge and dangerous to use when someone is lost his way and battery's out. People would not use battery car and they would rather use public transportation. If there is no innovative invent of substitute resource, the number of cars will be decreasing.
There are some other reasons of fewer cars using such as decreasing of population, government restrictions to use oil, lack of social infrastructures and so on. However, the most important reason is the fact that our fossil resources are depleting, and we should prepare for that next a few decades.
