I agree with the statement that today's young people do not participate to help their communities, because they don't have enough time to spend on such an activities. Someone may argue that, through the long history of the mankind, young people in each era should be very busy with their own task. However, even though they were as busy as our times' young people, nowadays are more compatible that any other period in human history.
In Korea, a lot of students in secondary education are suffering from after- school class in private institutions. They depends on private institutions from when they were elementary school. The have learned playing the piano, playing the football, even friendship through the private institution. All of these are competitive. Their parents are very afraid of their children' being a loser. As a results, young people do not have enough time to do other activities, and they only concentrate on the subject that will be helpful in their entrance in a good high school, a good university and finally getting a good job. Though young people nowadays have a mind to help and participate in their community, it is almost impossible for them practically.
Another reason that young people nowadays do not have enough time to help their communities is for the technology advance. As information technologies are growing faster, human can save much time on the simple traditional tasks, such like calculating, or searching for information. However, human needs more time to study new technology and be able to use newly developed computer programs. Especially, the recent survey results that younger people spends much more time on internet and almost of them are early adapter to newly developed facilities. They spend a lot of time doing something with their computers. So they hardly can think of helping other people, or their community.
In sum, high competitive surrounding that is confronted with younger people nowadays, advances in information and commutation technology and computer technology prevent young people to give enough time to helping their society.
