A broad knowledge of many academic subjects surely has many good aspects. But it also has two major disadvantages: it is limited in quality and quantity. It is virtually impossible to have a more- than-basic knowledge of very many academic subjects. And the more subjects there are you know something about, the smaller the amount of information will be that you have about these subjects. However, a broad basic knowledge of many academic subjects is nevertheless very beneficial.
But such a broad knowledge should not be based on the expense of very specific and detailed knowledge in a particular academic area. Our world today is incredibly advanced in all fields of science. More progression, new discoveries and inventions can only be achieved by specializing in one, or maybe a few, academic subjects.
If everyone had a broad knowledge, everybody would know the same things. There wouldn't be any experts with specific knowledge that could be further developed. Another result of having a detailed knowledge is the ability to work together with people who are specialized in a different branch of science. That means that some people with specific knowledge can achieve far more than a great number of people holding broad, but only basic, knowledge.
For example, researchers specialized on cellular structures are much more likely to discover unknown details about cells, because they exactly know what is already known, where there are chances for new discoveries. A researcher who is not specialized in cellular structures might very well discover something new, but it is possible that he doesn't realize that, because he thinks that it is only new to him, or her.
Another point is that research conducted today investigates very specific and detailed problems. It is thus impossible to contribute to such kind of research with broad basic knowledge.
I definitely favor specific and detailed knowledge, but I also understand the value and importance of a broad education. This kind of education is especially vital for teaching in elementary school and possible also high school. On a university level, however, a specific knowledge is clearly required.
